
The Project Gutenberg EBook of Lippincott's Horn-Ashbaugh Speller, by 
Ernest Horn and Ernest J. Ashbaugh

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Lippincott's Horn-Ashbaugh Speller
       For Grades One to Eight

Author: Ernest Horn
        Ernest J. Ashbaugh

Release Date: October 1, 2010 [EBook #33826]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LIPPINCOTT'S HORN-ASHBAUGH SPELLER ***




Produced by Larry B. Harrison and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






 

 

 

LIPPINCOTT'S

HORN-ASHBAUGH
SPELLER

FOR GRADES ONE TO EIGHT

 

BY

ERNEST HORN, Ph.D.

PROFESSOR OF EDUCATION AND DIRECTOR
OF THE UNIVERSITY ELEMENTARY SCHOOL
THE STATE UNIVERSITY OF IOWA

AND

ERNEST J. ASHBAUGH, Ph.D.

ASSOCIATE PROFESSOR OF EDUCATION AND CHIEF OF THE
BUREAU OF EDUCATIONAL TESTS AND MEASUREMENTS
THE STATE UNIVERSITY OF IOWA

 

PHILADELPHIA, LONDON, CHICAGO
J. B. LIPPINCOTT COMPANY

COPYRIGHT, 1920, BY J. B. LIPPINCOTT COMPANY

PRINTED BY J. B. LIPPINCOTT COMPANY
AT THE WASHINGTON SQUARE PRESS
PHILADELPHIA, U. S. A.

[Pg iii]

PREFACE

It is the intention of the authors to include sufficient discussion and directions to teachers so that this book may be taught with the highest possible degree of efficiency. Under general directions to teachers will be found a discussion of those points which concern all teachers regardless of grade. In addition, preceding the word list for each grade will be found supplementary directions to aid the teachers in facing the problems peculiar to that grade.

Special attention is called to the elaborate provision for making the pupil intelligent and responsible in his attack on his own spelling problems. This result is achieved by the testing plan which discovers to the pupil his deficiencies; by the standard scores which enable him to compare his accomplishment with that of other children; by the efficient method of study which is provided; and by the unusually rigorous follow-up work given in the review lessons. The authors therefore present this book to the pupils and teachers of the United States as a contribution to the solution of the problem of developing a nation of good spellers.

The Authors.
December, 1920.
[Pg v]

CONTENTS

 	 	PAGE
Preface	 	iii
 	 	 
General Directions to Teachers	 	vii-xiv
 	 	 
Directions to Pupils	 	xiv-xvi
 	 	 
Directions to Teachers of Grade I	 	2
    Word List, Grade I	 	3-5
 	 	 
Directions to Teachers of Grade II	 	8
    Word List, Grade II	 	9-14
 	 	 
Directions to Teachers of Grade III	 	16-17
    Word List, Grade III	 	19-27
 	 	 
Directions to Teachers of Grade IV	 	30
    Word List, Grade IV	 	31-40
 	 	 
Directions to Teachers of Grade V	 	42
    Word List, Grade V	 	43-52
 	 	 
Directions to Teachers of Grade VI	 	54
    Word List, Grade VI	 	55-64
 	 	 
Directions to Teachers of Grade VII	 	66
    Word List, Grade VII	 	67-78
 	 	 
Directions to Teachers of Grade VIII	 	80
    Word List, Grade VIII	 	81-95
 	 	 
Dictation Exercises	 	97-105
[Pg vii]

LIPPINCOTT'S
HORN-ASHBAUGH SPELLER

GENERAL DIRECTIONS TO TEACHERS.

How the Teaching of Spelling May be Improved.—The teaching of spelling may be improved in three ways: first, by selecting a better list of words for the pupil to study; second, by placing before the pupils of each grade the words that are most appropriate for them; and third, by introducing economical procedures in learning. The first is the problem of the course of study; the second, the problem of grading; and the third, the problem of method.

The Vocabulary.—To solve the first problem one must insure that the pupils will study all words they are likely to use in life outside the school. One must also insure that the pupils' time will not be wasted through their being required to learn words which they will never use. This problem has been solved for you by the authors of the text. The vocabulary of the lessons is taken from a compilation which Doctor Horn has made of ten scientific investigations of the words used in writing letters. These investigations, taken together, represent the careful analysis of over three-quarters of a million running words of correspondence. If you will analyze one letter, you will see what a very great amount of work these investigations have required. It seems very unlikely that any word commonly and frequently used should have been overlooked in all of these investigations.

These ten studies contain all of the information which is available at the present time concerning what words are likely to be used in writing letters. Accordingly, there is no word in this speller which has not been reported in one or more of these investigations. In addition, this vocabulary has been carefully compared with all of the other types of reading and writing vocabularies.

[Pg viii] Among these are the studies of children's themes, such as those by Jones, by the teachers of New Orleans, Kansas City, and Richmond, Virginia; the various studies of adult reading vocabularies, such as those by Eldridge and Knowles, aggregating over 140,000 running words; the studies of the vocabulary of school readers, such as those by Packer, Housh, and Miller, aggregating over one-half million running words. No word has been taken from these studies which did not occur in the investigations of the vocabulary of personal and business letters. On the other hand, these studies showed quite clearly that the words found as the result of the analysis of three-quarters of a million running words of correspondence are really basic in any writing vocabulary.

If you will examine the book, you will see that most of the lessons are numbered with arabic numerals. These lessons contain a minimum list of 3998 words found to be used most frequently. You will notice, also, that beginning with grade three there are in each grade supplementary lessons, marked S-1, S-2, etc. These lessons include 580 additional words which are somewhat less frequently used. The supplementary lessons are distributed by grades, so that pupils who finish the minimum work for any grade will have additional lessons to study for the remainder of the year. However, before undertaking these supplementary lessons, the teacher should make sure that her pupils have learned thoroughly the minimum list which contains the important words.

Plan of Review.—The provision for the complete elimination of spelling errors is particularly efficient and thoroughgoing. Not only are those words which most commonly give difficulty arranged for, but the method of testing insures that each pupil will eliminate his own peculiar errors. No pains have been spared to obtain this thoroughness without wasting the pupils' time in mere routine review.

During the week in which each lesson is taught for the first time, each pupil is tested three times on every word in the lesson. He spends his time in concentrated attack on the words which have given him difficulty. One month later this lesson is given as a test, and the words missed by each pupil re-learned by him. At the end of the week this lesson is again given as a test.

[Pg ix] In addition, at the beginning of each grade above the first, the words which have been previously taught, but which according to Doctor Ashbaugh's investigation still give difficulty, are thoroughly reviewed. Finally, in the seventh grade, the words which are most frequently missed by grammar grade pupils are given additional review.

It must be kept in mind that these reviews are not haphazard, nor are they a matter of guesswork. Each review list is made up on the basis of the most careful scientific study of persistent errors.

Grading.—The lessons in each grade are those which the pupils in that grade may most profitably study. The words have been graded in the following manner: On the basis of Doctor Horn's compilation of correspondence vocabularies, all of the 4578 words were ranked according to the frequency with which they are used in correspondence. On the basis of Doctor Ashbaugh's study of the difficulty of these words in the various grades, the words were arranged in order of ease of spelling. With these two sources of data, the lessons are arranged so that in general the easiest words and those most commonly and frequently used are placed in the lower grades. In addition, on the basis of scientific analysis of the vocabulary of first, second, and third readers, the authors determined which words occurred most often in these readers. The words included in the lessons for the first three grades are not only easy and fairly common, but are found also in popular readers of the grades in which they are placed. For example, the word "and" was found 23,773 times in the letters analyzed in the various investigations upon which the book is based; and it is mispeled by but four second grade children out of a hundred. It also occurs in every one of ten commonly used first readers. Since it is one of the very commonest words, is easy to spell, and is found in all first readers, it is placed in the first list in the book. In a similar way every lesson in the first three grades has been a matter of computation. The lessons in grades above the third have been made in the same careful fashion, except that occurrences in readers were not taken into consideration. It is clear that the lessons increase gradually in difficulty in each successive grade, and that a pupil who is forced to leave school [Pg x] at the end of grade six or seven will have learned the words which he is most likely to need in writing.

Standard Scores.—By means of standard errors at the close of each lesson, the pupils and teachers may compare results with those of other grades and with those obtained in the country at large. These standards were taken from the Ashbaugh Scale and from a supplementary study conducted by Doctor Ashbaugh and Doctor Horn to determine the standards for words not included in the original scale. It must be kept in mind that these standard errors are high, being the result of the present unfavorable conditions of the teaching of spelling in the country at large. They are used merely for the purpose of comparison. The ideal to keep before your class is that they should learn their lessons so that they will not mispel a single word, but this ideal is intensified by the use of the standard errors.

How to Teach the Lesson.—Four points must be kept in mind as more important than any others:

1. The teacher must test her pupils on each lesson before they begin to study.

2. Each pupil should study only the words which he mispeled on the test.

3. He must be taught an economical method of study.

4. He must see clearly what progress he is making.

Detailed suggestions for teaching the lessons are given in the paragraphs which follow. These suggestions are based upon the investigations reviewed by Doctor Horn in the Eighteenth Yearbook of the National Society for the Study of Education. The method has been tried out thoroughly in public school classrooms, and has proved uniformly successful. Teachers are urged to follow it as closely as possible. If, however, the teacher prefers another method of study, she may use it. The book may be used with any method.

Getting Started Right.—The first few lessons may well be spent in systematizing class procedure and teaching pupils how to study a spelling lesson. Begin by pointing out the importance of spelling. Give cases, if possible, where people have been discredited because of spelling errors in letters. Discuss with the class how the words in this book were selected, how the standard errors at the close of each lesson were secured, and how the [Pg xi] method of study was determined. The pupils may now be introduced to the procedure which will be used in conducting the spelling class, and to the method of study.

Teaching Pupils How to Work.—Many teachers have found the following procedure very satisfactory. Have the pupils open their books at the first lesson for their grade. Explain to them that a great many men have spent much time and money in finding out the best way to learn to spell, and that the method which is to be used is based on what these men have recommended. Have the class read the directions to pupils given on pages xiv–xvi. After the directions have been read, have several pupils summarize them. When you have made sure that the class has the main points clearly in mind, the actual work of habituating the method may be begun. The first few lessons in each term should consist of practice in the method of study. This practice should be continued until you are satisfied that the pupils understand thoroughly how to go about their work. Remember that even though teachers in the preceding grades are using the method, there may be pupils in your grade who are new to the system, as well as some who have forgotten how to study. From the nature of the method, it is easy to detect any child who is not using it. Insist that the correct method be used from the outset. As soon as the pupils have learned the method of study, the regular work of learning the lessons may begin.

How the Lessons Should be Taught.—The lessons are planned to be completed in a week. A week's work, therefore, consists of twenty new words and twenty review words except in grade one, where the week's work consists of ten new words and ten review words. The following schedule is recommended.

Monday.—The first step in teaching a lesson is an exercise in pronunciation. Have the pupils open their books at the advanced lesson. Pronounce each word, enunciating the syllables very distinctly. Each word which in your judgment is not understood by the class should be used in a sentence. All homonyms should be so used. Have the pupils pronounce each word after you in concert, enunciating the syllables very distinctly. Insist on careful pronunciation on the part of every pupil.

This exercise precedes the spelling test because of the importance of pronunciation in the method of study, and because of [Pg xii] the probability that this initial attention to the correct form of the word is desirable. Since the pupils undoubtedly learn something as a result of this exercise, they may be expected to make somewhat better scores than those given in the book. These scores are the results of tests given without such a preliminary exercise in pronunciation.

After all the words have been pronounced, have the pupils close their texts and prepare papers for a written test. This test will include the new lesson. It may be written on any sort of paper, the words being written in columns of twenty to correspond to the arrangement of the words in the book. Pronounce each word once only. Pupils should write the words without hesitation. No alterations in the first attempt at spelling the word should be allowed.

After the words have all been dictated, have the pupils exchange papers for the purpose of correcting. Be sure that each pupil understands that he is marking his neighbor's paper, so that errors which have been made may be corrected. Instruct the class to mark a word wrong if it is mispeled, if it cannot be read, or if any change in the first attempt at spelling has been made. Be sure that each pupil understands that, until he is able to write a word correctly the first time, he has not sufficiently learned it.

The words may be corrected on the basis of the teacher's oral spelling or by the book. Each word found to be mispeled should be marked wrong by placing after it an X.

When the papers have been returned to the owners, each pupil should write the correct form of the words which he has mispeled. The words missed on the test will constitute his task for the week.

Tuesday.—On Tuesday the pupils study, each working on his own errors and using the method recommended under directions to pupils. Pupils who made no errors on the test may be excused from this study period, but not from the succeeding test. It frequently happens that a pupil will spell a word correctly on one test and mispel it on a following test.

The teacher should closely supervise the pupils' study in order to insure that proper methods of learning are used. She may also help to direct the work of those who, having made no [Pg xiii] errors on the preceding test, have been allowed to undertake some other task. The class should not be tested on this day.

Wednesday.—Test on the new and on the review lesson. This review lesson should consist of a lesson taught one month before. Since the first four lessons in each grade are made up of words taught in the preceding grade, these may well be used for the first month as review lessons. The words may be corrected and the errors recorded as on Monday. Compare the number of errors made on this test with those made on the preceding test. This comparison will show the pupil what progress he has made. The remainder of the period may be spent in studying the words missed on this test.

Thursday.—Study as on Tuesday.

Friday.—Test on the new and on the review lesson, correct the papers as on Monday, and spend the rest of the period studying the errors made on this final test. Compare the number of errors made on this test with the number made on the first and second tests. The comparison gives the child a measure of accomplishment for the week. The teacher should check this day's papers in order to have an accurate record of the status of the pupils at the close of the week's work. Many teachers have found it helpful to keep a chart of progress on the blackboard.

Individual Instruction.—It is clear from the preceding directions that the method of learning and the class administration are intended to insure that each pupil will learn those words which give him difficulty, and that he will, at the same time, progress at his own rate. With the possible exception of the fact that only the commonly used words are taught, this is the most important provision in the book.

The Spelling Notebook.—It has been found to be very helpful to have each pupil keep a notebook in which to record words missed in the various spelling tests or in papers written in connection with other subjects. This notebook tends to make the pupil more conscientious with regard to his spelling. It also gives him a record of his errors so that when he has time for review work he can utilize it properly.

The Problem of Interest.—Teachers who have used the method which is here recommended have been unanimous in reporting not only that the pupils learned more rapidly, but also [Pg xiv] that they worked with greater enthusiasm. This increased interest is secured without any use of soft pedagogy. It comes from several sources. First, the pupils know that the words in the book are those most commonly needed in writing. Second, the pupils quickly see the advantage of centering their efforts on words which they have actually missed. Third, by means of standard scores they are enabled to compare their spelling ability with that of children in other parts of the country. Fourth, they can see what they are accomplishing. Fifth, these provisions make possible the joy which comes from doing vigorously and thoroughly a clean-cut task that needs to be done. These are the interests which appeal to sensible men and women in life outside the school, and they have proved sufficient for children. Many attempts have been made to substitute devices for these wholesome and fundamental interests. Such attempts not only fail in their purpose, but actually distract the child's mind from the work he has to do. Sugar-coating inevitably destroys the child's appetite for healthy vigorous work.

DIRECTIONS TO PUPILS

Why These Words Should be Studied.—One of the ways by which people judge the writer of a letter is by the presence or absence of spelling errors. Often a young man or young woman has failed to obtain a desirable position because of spelling errors in a letter of application. Even in the ordinary friendly letter, spelling errors make a bad impression. The words which you are to learn from this spelling book are the words which people most frequently use in writing letters. Thousands of letters were read, and each word found was recorded. This book, therefore, contains the words most commonly used in writing, and does not contain any word which has not been found in letters.

How to Learn the Words.—The first step in the study of each lesson will be an exercise in pronunciation. Your teacher will pronounce each word for you. Look at your book closely, noticing each syllable as she pronounces it. When the teacher asks you to pronounce the word after her, look at each syllable closely as you pronounce it.

The second step in learning the lesson is the test. Write each word as plainly as you can and without hesitation. The purpose [Pg xv] of this test is to see whether or not there are any words in the lesson which you cannot spell. The words which you cannot spell will be your work in spelling for the week.

If your teacher asks you to exchange papers for the purpose of correcting them, be sure to do your work very carefully. If you fail to mark a word wrong that has been mispeled, the pupil whose paper you marked will not be able to know that the word should be studied, and so will suffer an injury. On the other hand, it will be very confusing if you mark a word wrong which is really correct. Mark any word wrong that you cannot easily read; also any word if a letter has been written over or a change made. Remember that the purpose of the test is to find out which words need to be studied. The grades of the pupil whose papers you correct are not affected in any way by your marking.

The Meaning of "The Standard Number of Errors."—The words in this book have been given to a great many children in each grade in a number of cities. In that way it was possible to find out the number of errors which children of each grade ordinarily make. If you will compare the number of errors which you make on the test with the number of errors at the bottom of your lesson, you will be able to see how your spelling compares with that of pupils in other parts of the country.

How to Learn to Spell a Word.—A great many men have spent much time and money in finding out for you the best way to learn to spell. The directions which follow are based on what these men have discovered.

1. The first thing to do in learning to spell a word is to pronounce it correctly. Pronounce the word, saying each syllable very distinctly, and looking closely at each syllable as you say it.

2. With closed eyes try to see the word in your book, syllable by syllable, as you pronounce it in a whisper. In pronouncing the words, be sure to say each syllable distinctly. After saying the word, keep trying to recall how the word looked in your book, and at the same time say the letters. Spell by syllables.

3. Open your eyes, and look at the word to see whether or not you had it right.

4. Look at the word again, saying the syllables very distinctly. If you did not have the word right on your first trial, say the letters this time as you look sharply at the syllables.

[Pg xvi] 5. Try again with closed eyes to see the word as you spell the syllables in a whisper.

6. Look again at your book to see if you had the word right. Keep trying until you can spell each syllable correctly with closed eyes.

7. When you feel sure that you have learned the word, write it without looking at your book, and then compare your attempt with the book to see whether or not you wrote it correctly.

8. Now write the word three times, covering each trial with your hand before you write the word the next time, so that you cannot copy. If all of these trials are right, you may say that you have learned the word for the present. If you make a single mistake, begin with the first direction and go through each step again.

9. Study each word by this method. Take special pains to attend closely to each step in the method. Hard and careful work is what counts.

Take Pains with Your Spelling in all Writing.—Take pride in having your compositions and letters free from spelling errors. When you are in the slightest doubt as to how to spell a word, look it up in the dictionary before you write it. When you have found the word in the dictionary, learn it by the method by which you study your regular spelling lessons. In a similar way, if you do make a mistake in spelling in your compositions, learn the word which you mispeled by this same method.

Reviews.—Whenever you have a few minutes after having prepared some lesson, turn back to the errors which you have made on previous spelling tests and spend some time going over the words which you missed on those tests. Occasionally when you are at home, you will find it interesting to have your mother or father or some friend test you over all the words you have missed during the year. You should not be satisfied until you can spell every word correctly.

Notebook.—Keep a spelling notebook. Whether your teacher requires it or not, you will find it very much worth while to keep a spelling notebook. In this you should record all words missed on any test or in compositions which you write. If you find that you are frequently missing a word, write it in a special list and review it frequently.

[Pg 1]

FIRST GRADE

[Pg 2]

DIRECTIONS TO FIRST GRADE TEACHERS

The words in the lessons for first grade children are few in number and relatively easy. You will notice that most of them are phonetic. Each word has been found to be used in correspondence and in a majority of first grade readers. This list is therefore particularly appropriate for first grade children and may be easily learned by them. The authors recommend that this work be begun in the second half year.

Directions for Teaching.—Read again the general directions on pages vii to xvi, inclusive. In general the method used in grade one is the same as that used in later grades. There are, however, certain important differences. You will notice, for example, that first grade lessons contain ten instead of twenty words. You will need also to give more attention for the first two or three weeks to initiating correct habits of study. Remember that teachers above grade one will build upon habits which you initiate.

The words in the first grade list are very simple, so that there should be no difficulty in learning to spell them. Neither should the children have any difficulty in understanding any of the one hundred fifty words.

Directions for Schools in Which the Pupils do Not Write in Grade One.—The pupils in such schools should be taught to study according to the first six directions given under How to Learn to Spell a Word, page xv. The tests in these cases will have to be oral tests. Otherwise, the methods recommended in the general directions may be used.

 

  1	  2	  3	  4 [Pg 3]
is	be	but	that
and	can	dear	to-day
are	dog	did	up
day	good	do	was
he	my	go	an
in	see	his	as
it	she	little	big
me	you	look	come
all	book	not	for
at	boy	out	get
 

Standard Number of Errors
I. ( )	I. ( )	I. ( )	I. ( )
II. 1	II. 1	II. 2	II. 2
III. 0	III. 1	III. 1	III. 1
 

 

  5	  6	  7	  8 [Pg 4]
hand	old	way	gold
have	on	will	hat
if	one	your	her
into	over	away	home
land	run	by	how
last	say	cannot	ice
let	tell	doing	looking
like	the	down	love
man	this	eat	of
may	tree	give	play
 

Standard Number of Errors
I. ( )	I. ( )	I. ( )	I. ( )
II. 2	II. 2	II. 3	II. 3
III. 1	III. 1	III. 1	III. 1
 

 

   9	 10	 11	 12 [Pg 5]
so	us	bee	far
some	we	box	fast
ten	when	call	fat
thank	wind	cane	five
them	with	cat	from
then	after	coat	gave
thing	am	cold	girl
think	apple	corn	going
three	baby	cow	green
time	bed	each	had
 

Standard Number of Errors
I. ( )	I. ( )	I. ( )	I. ( )
II. 3	II. 3	II 4	II. 4
III. 1	III. 2	III. 2	III. 2
 

 

 13	 14	 15	 16 [Pg 6]
hard	must	school	all
has	night	send	be
hen	no	six	see
just	or	snow	not
live	pig	sun	may
made	playing	they	for
make	put	top	in
milk	red	what	do
mother	ring	wood	so
much	sat	ran	no
 

Standard Number of Errors
I. ( )	I. ( )	I. ( )	I. ( )
II. 4	II. 4	II. 4	II. 1
III. 2	III. 2	III. 2	III. 1
 

[Pg 7]

SECOND GRADE

[Pg 8]

DIRECTIONS TO SECOND GRADE TEACHERS

The second grade list of words contains 340 new words in addition to the review lessons, which include 80 of the most difficult first grade words, and 60 of the homonyms which give the most trouble. The new words are all words frequently used, are words which second grade children can learn easily and, for the most part, are frequently found in the second readers most commonly used. You will find that the method outlined below will enable you to teach these words so that your classes will make very nearly a perfect score on them.

Directions for Teaching.—Read again the directions for teaching as given on pages vii to xvi. You will find it advisable to take some time at the beginning of the term to teach pupils how to study. You will still find it necessary to correct the papers yourself. You may follow the same schedule as that outlined in the general directions. Watch particularly for improper methods of study.

Second grade pupils should write their tests without hesitation and with fair speed. Explain to the pupils with great care that letters which are not made plainly will be counted wrong.

Remember that the lessons are arranged by weeks rather than by days. The work for each week consists of one advance column and one review column. The review column in each case is the fourth column preceding the advance work. That is, it is made up of a week's work one month old. For example, column 5 contains 20 new words to be learned in one week. During the same week, column 1 should be reviewed. The lesson for the first week consists of column 1, which is the advance lesson, and of column R 1, which is the review.

 

 R-1	 R-2	 R-3	 R-4 [Pg 9]
dear	sat	top	make
fat	bee	playing	milk
cow	baby	came	her
get	has	pig	apple
some	home	give	with
we	looking	had	when
way	love	from	down
run	red	far	six
gold	like	call	send
cat	going	ice	school
cold	corn	thank	live
or	box	put	gave
them	am	fast	snow
girl	then	by	what
this	eat	made	mother
three	thing	night	after
ring	much	one	just
cannot	time	bed	hard
wind	over	sun	wood
hat	they	must	five
 

Standard Number of Errors
I. ( )	I. ( )	I. ( )	I. ( )
II. 5	II. 6	II. 7	II. 8
III. 3	III. 3	III. 3	III. 4
 

 

  1	  2	  3	  4 [Pg 10]
ask	forget	ear	year
back	fun	days	ago
best	grass	sing	door
bill	happy	doll	got
black	hay	hope	May
blow	hill	grow	bad
bring	him	boys	ball
butter	hot	fly	bank
cake	inside	hands	bell
cap	its	pink	end
child	joy	dry	foot
cup	keep	times	free
cut	kind	string	king
ever	kiss	bread	letter
face	late	needs	most
farm	lay	rise	same
feet	left	skin	ship
fill	light	cry	till
fish	low	story	yet
food	meat	tall	about
 

Standard Number of Errors
I. ( )	I. ( )	I. ( )	I. ( )
II. 8	II. 8	II. 7	II 6
III. 4	III. 4	III. 3	III. 3
 

 

  5	  6	  7	  8 [Pg 11]
more	said	very	beside
morning	sand	wall	better
Mr.	sent	want	bird
name	side	war	blue
never	sister	week	brother
nine	small	well	calling
now	stand	west	mild
off	standing	where	care
once	state	why	city
papa	stay	win	cook
part	sweet	wish	cover
pen	take	work	cream
place	telling	yes	dark
poor	there	afternoon	deep
rain	to	any	dinner
read	told	around	drive
rest	took	barn	drop
rich	town	bear	dust
ride	two	became	east
room	under	become	even
 

Standard Number of Errors
I. ( )	I. ( )	I. ( )	I. ( )
II. 8	II. 8	II. 9	II. 10
III. 4	III. 4	III. 5	III. 5
 

 

  9	 10	 11	 12 [Pg 12]
eye	large	pick	sold
fall	life	pine	son
fell	lived	plan	song
felt	lives	river	soon
find	long	road	spring
fine	longer	rock	step
flat	looked	rose	stop
found	mine	sad	store
four	Miss	saw	such
gate	mud	saying	summer
glad	myself	seed	supper
gone	near	seen	table
gray	now	sell	thin
head	nice	set	thinking
hear	noon	sheep	to-night
help	oh	shop	too
here	older	show	trust
hold	open	sleep	upon
house	our	slow	walk
hunt	outside	soft	water
 

Standard Number of Errors
I. ( )	I. ( )	I. ( )	I. ( )
II. 10	II. 10	II. 10	II. 10
III. 5	III. 5	III. 5	III. 5
 

 

 13	 14	 15	 16 [Pg 13]
went	bright	fellow	market
were	bringing	fire	master
while	buy	first	meal
who	children	flower	meet
wide	clear	frost	met
wife	clock	gather	might
window	close	given	mind
winter	coming	glass	move
without	cool	ground	nap
air	could	hang	neck
alive	dance	held	next
also	die	horse	north
asleep	done	June	nothing
ate	pale	know	other
been	dress	lady	pass
behind	every	leave	goats
bid	fair	leg	right
bit	farmer	lift	round
boat	father	loved	rush
both	feed	many	seven
 

Standard Number of Errors
I. ( )	I. ( )	I. ( )	I. ( )
II. 12	II. 12	II. 12	II. 12
III. 6	III. 7	III. 7	III. 7
 

 

 17	 18	 19	 20 [Pg 14]
shall	to	seen	oh
short	way	him	wood
shut	we	hay	blue
sick	dear	rain	hear
sit	some	can't	fair
something	ring	here	might
sound	ball	there	new
south	bee	son	buy
start	May	too	know
stick	bad	bear	meet
still	red	two	right
stood	one	low	road
street	by	sell	die
taken	made	ate	done
taking	sun	very	flower
teach	feet	read	air
then	Miss	our	be
these	do	four	bread
true	sent	gray	needs
try	week	meat	not
 

Standard Number of Errors
I. ( )	I. ( )	I. ( )	I. ( )
II. 12	II. 6	II. 9	II. 12
III. 7	III. 3	III. 5	III. 7
 

[Pg 15]

THIRD GRADE

[Pg 16]

DIRECTIONS TO THIRD GRADE TEACHERS

The advance lessons, numbered 1 to 28 inclusive, contain a minimum list of 528 new words. The supplementary list contains 80 words, which although easy to spell are not so frequently used in writing letters as are the words of the minimum list. This supplementary list is meant for those schools which because of the long school term or for other reasons, finish the minimum list before the end of the term or year. The lessons marked R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, are made up of the eighty words taught in preceding grades, but which still give considerable difficulty to third grade children. They should be thoroughly mastered.

Directions for Teacher.—For the first few lessons direct your attention to systematizing class procedure and to teaching pupils how to study effectively. Read carefully again the suggestions on pages vii to xvi.

Pupils in the third grade should be able to make their own corrections so that time may now be saved by having the pupils exchange papers during the first two tests. The teacher should continue to correct the papers written on the final test. The following suggestions will be helpful in getting the coöperation of pupils. After the papers have been exchanged say, "In writing, it is important not only that you know how to spell, but also that you make your letters so that the person who reads your paper can tell easily what you have written. This is the reason that I have asked you to exchange papers. Many people write so that certain letters cannot be told from other letters. This is true of z, g, and y; o and a; t and l; n and u; h and k. When you correct papers and cannot tell which of two letters the writer intended, mark the word wrong. Also mark it wrong if a letter has been [Pg 17] written over or a change made. Words should be learned so that they will be written correctly without hesitation the first time. Any word which has not been learned so that it may be written correctly the first time should be studied again.

"Remember that the purpose of this test is to find out which words need further study. It does not affect your grades. You will do the pupil whose paper you have a favor by marking his errors so that he may correct them. Mark each error by placing after it a cross—so (x)."

Pupils should keep a special list of words which they have missed in their compositions. These words should be studied by the same method used in studying the regular spelling lesson. Such words will not be taken up, however, in the regular lessons.

Remember that the lessons are arranged by weeks rather than by days. The work for each week consists of one advance column and one review column. The review column in each case is the fourth column preceding the advance work. That is, it is made up of a week's work one month old. For example, column 5 contains 20 new words to be learned in one week. During the same week, column 1 should be reviewed. The lesson for the first week consists of column 1, which is the advance lesson, and of column R 1, which is the review.

 

 R-1	 R-2	 R-3	 R-4 [Pg 18]
[Pg 19]
dark	meal	also	five
fair	market	held	shed
feed	leave	nap	leg
June	gather	sound	might
sit	air	these	frost
nothing	alive	lift	shall
nor	street	hope	white
saying	stick	buy	looked
step	something	neck	taken
drop	took	next	loved
dress	master	short	than
road	glass	such	hang
ground	both	right	pass
given	been	move	asleep
other	behind	mind	fellow
bit	bright	met	small
beside	lady	done	farmer
became	walk	seven	know
gray	try	fire	bringing
water	thinking	rush	taking
 

Standard Number of Errors
II. 6	II. 7	II. 7	II. 8
III. 3	III. 3	III. 3	III. 4
IV. 1	IV. 1	IV. 1	IV. 2
 

 

  1	  2	  3	  4 [Pg 20]
tone	banks	toy	bay
blush	yours	age	cent
cramp	tan	being	grade
goods	bag	lot	Monday
tub	line	pay	pie
blot	dine	seeing	pin
cards	guns	along	stove
cars	map	aside	trip
cave	bind	band	bat
chase	girls	belong	blank
darn	save	game	car
hook	kinds	hall	card
keg	bath	lake	date
lip	lap	lost	hog
yell	lock	mad	kid
pave	weeks	March	landing
peck	fool	nut	mail
plants	salt	oil	mark
sole	near-by	silk	net
split	plans	singing	park
 

Standard Number of Errors
II. 4	II. 8	II. 8	II. 9
III. 2	III. 4	III. 4	III. 5
IV. 1	IV. 2	IV. 1	IV. 2
 

 

  5	  6	  7	  8 [Pg 21]
horn	sport	page	rent
looks	Sunday	paper	spell
dig	tent	plate	post
gives	working	price	thanking
pant	able	spent	train
mouse	arm	walking	add
shore	art	willing	bean
tall	bake	within	bet
bless	born	yard	bunch
fond	faster	added	cane
showing	finding	asking	cash
mat	forgot	below	cattle
pipe	form	blame	clay
books	grand	camp	colder
tender	helping	cast	cooking
steam	hit	Christmas	cord
roar	ill	class	farming
star	kill	clean	list
tool	mill	cost	lunch
bone	note	danger	paying
 

Standard Number of Errors
II. 9	II. 10	II. 11	II. 11
III. 5	III. 5	III. 6	III. 6
V. 2	IV. 2	IV. 3	IV. 3
 

 

  9	 10	 11	 12 [Pg 22]
ink	drum	lump	rice
inch	egg	mate	rug
print	feeding	mouth	slip
brand	finger	number	smart
tenth	fit	order	spelling
tip	forgive	ours	stamp
plow	Friday	pole	test
wake	fur	porch	washing
whenever	glee	race	wishing
wild	goat	rate	belt
fort	grant	reading	grape
peach	heat	real	eve
sin	holding	report	glove
wool	hour	saved	job
sum	however	seat	lace
rail	hunting	shot	law
sack	July	sink	mend
rank	kindly	sort	ranch
brick	larger	spot	roll
write	luck	stone	self
 

Standard Number of Errors
II. 11	II. 12	II. 12	II. 12
II. 7	III. 7	III. 7	III. 8
IV. 3	IV. 3	IV. 3	IV. 4
 

 

 13	 14	 15	 16 [Pg 23]
wash	rather	teacher	birthday
wet	full	tie	bite
slide	strong	whatever	block
stock	hug	across	body
swell	strange	again	dig
trade	draw	ahead	boxes
wheel	lines	alone	broke
word	candy	always	brought
drew	sail	another	called
shows	drink	apart	case
blood	goes	April	catch
lots	comes	asked	chair
grapes	pile	aunt	check
forms	dare	badly	church
mix	means	basket	cloth
rub	shake	beat	clothing
sake	swing	because	club
maid	hide	beg	coal
sweep	desk	begin	contest
fry	wants	bench	corner
 

Standard Number of Errors
II. 13	II. 13	II. 13	II. 13
III. 8	III. 8	III. 8	III. 8
IV. 4	IV. 4	IV. 4	IV. 4
 

 

 17	 18	 19	 20 [Pg 24]
count	garden	killed	own
cross	gift	later	pack
darling	grandma	least	pain
dead	great	less	party
deal	soda	lie	passing
dearly	hair	lovely	past
December	half	making	picking
deed	happen	matter	please
died	harder	mean	plum
early	hardly	miss	pocket
eighth	having	money	point
enter	hearing	nearly	pound
evening	apples	shame	pure
fear	herself	need	queen
fight	high	nobody	rabbit
file	himself	none	reach
floor	hole	nor	riding
flour	hundred	nose	rolling
forest	indeed	oats	roof
forth	jump	only	row
 

Standard Number of Errors
II. 13	II. 13	II. 13	II. 13
III. 8	III. 8	III. 8	III. 8
IV. 4	IV. 4	IV. 4	IV. 4
 

 

 21	 22	 23	 24 [Pg 25]
safe	alike	those	hour
seem	white	thought	mail
sending	pork	thus	write
shade	yellow	tiny	flour
shape	yourself	twenty	eight
shoe	shoot	warm	weak
sight	spite	washed	sole
silver	swim	weak	ours
sir	things	which	past
sorry	gay	wonder	their
space	grave	erect	beat
spend	golden	worked	pain
spending	sharp	world	flower
spoke	smell	woven	hall
storm	smile	yesterday	maid
sunshine	stir	above	sum
talk	boy	act	real
talking	drawn	almost	ate
teeth	blanket	anything	cent
their	feather	before	need
 

Standard Number of Errors
II. 13	II. 13	II. 14	II. 13
III. 8	III. 9	III. 9	III. 8
IV. 4	IV. 4	IV. 4	IV. 4
 

 

 25	 26	 27	 28 [Pg 26]
feast	fix	quilt	sent
men	figs	rag	fur
moon	kept	rid	real
mile	lamp	sauce	sail
plant	pan	speech	roll
bags	soul	spoon	sour
beans	spoil	steak	stain
dish	truth	straw	boy
lead	wed	vines	died
hogs	roots	worms	forth
crutch	bare	ants	great
prune	fought	bark	mid
smoke	blight	bend	bus
spray	led	bills	dirt
tea	comb	breath	hair
thanks	farms	fields	choose
sea	eggs	bud	lie
laugh	lawn	lend	seem
knee	miles	hills	taste
pears	pail	key	skip
 

Standard Number of Errors
II. 12	II. 15	II. 15	II. 15
III. 7	III. 10	III. 10	III. 10
IV. 3	IV. 5	IV. 5	IV. 5
 

 

 S-1	 S-2	 S-3	 S-4 [Pg 27]
cab	pet	asks	trick
cape	heal	bald	mumps
bug	heel	pails	takes
dull	hens	blind	bedtime
fold	grin	crack	pants
poem	pour	bush	hilly
gun	pray	bull	flight
kick	hose	cords	houses
scratch	pond	cuff	postman
mop	twin	dusty	hoarse
nail	make	dwell	hopes
pint	rode	drag	knife
ties	loaf	drown	greet
push	loop	desk	lamps
rope	root	plush	makes
split	scar	sadly	gloves
mob	tuck	scalp	gentle
nod	moth	roses	glance
pad	oars	glue	manly
rob	weed	grab	shelf
 

Standard Number of Errors
II. 15	II. 15	II. 15	II. 15
III. 10	III. 10	III. 10	III. 10
IV. 5	IV. 5	IV. 5	IV. 5
 

[Pg 28]
[Pg 29]

FOURTH GRADE

[Pg 30]

DIRECTIONS TO FOURTH GRADE TEACHERS

The advanced lessons numbered 1 to 32 inclusive contain 620 new words. The supplementary list containing 80 new words is meant for schools which because of the long term or for other reasons, finish the minimum list of words before the end of the year. The lessons marked R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, are made up of the 80 words in the third grade list which are most commonly mispeled by fourth grade children. These 80 words should be thoroughly mastered. There are also reviewed 20 homonyms which commonly are confused by children of this grade.

Directions for Teaching.—Read the preface and study with particular care the suggestions given on pages vii to xvi. It would be well also to read the suggestions to first, second and third grade teachers. You will need to supervise the correction of papers by pupils very closely.

Remember that the lessons are arranged by weeks rather than by days. The work for each week consists of one advance column and one review column. The review column in each case is the fourth column preceding the advance work. That is, it is made up of a week's work one month old. For example, column 5 contains 20 new words to be learned in one week. During the same week, column 1 should be reviewed. The lesson for the first week consists of column 1, which is the advance lesson, and of column R 1, which is the review.

 

 R-1	 R-2	 R-3	 R-4 [Pg 31]
[Pg 19]
ranch	herself	check	pound
movement	rabbit	file	roof
badly	shame	garden	sending
before	those	himself	shade
lie	lovely	lace	silver
nor	need	miss	spoke
past	rolling	only	stock
beg	seem	tiny	trade
corner	beg	which	begin
cast	bench	across	darling
least	bite	act	deed
slide	drew	beat	feeding
fear	flour	belt	fit
gift	forth	called	goat
indeed	happen	cloth	soda
roll	killed	club	jump
almost	none	hundred	mend
anything	their	list	pack
enter	woven	matter	queen
spend	brick	nearly	rank
 

Standard Number of Errors
III. 12	III. 10	III. 10	III. 6
IV. 6	IV. 5	IV. 5	IV. 3
V. 2	V. 2	V. 2	V. 1
 

 

  1	  2	  3	  4 [Pg 32]
Jan.	October	brush	kitten
Nov.	oven	burn	leader
banker	printed	carpet	lover
delay	soil	cleaning	liver
Feb.	remove	counting	lumber
goldfish	snowed	dandy	mailed
overcoat	snowing	depend	enroll
Sat.	stage	dollar	nation
worker	tank	dresser	office
officers	teaching	fence	outfit
overlook	Tuesday	fifty	paint
backing	yearly	football	banking
covering	dislike	friend	stated
Dec.	scratch	garment	proper
fishing	agree	handed	sixty
grove	Aug.	heating	rained
handy	belonging	homesick	recall
longest	board	inches	recover
maker	boss	January	remark
Oct.	bother	kinder	renter
 

Standard Number of Errors
III. 6	III. 7	III. 8	III. 8
IV. 3	IV. 4	IV. 4	IV. 4
V. 1	V. 1	V. 2	V. 2
 

 

  5	  6	  7	  8 [Pg 33]
reader	sample	fork	know
adding	sickness	ham	speak
size	railroad	rule	blew
rust	post card	Mrs.	wheat
likely	some one	pair	third
skate	speaker	use	easy
soap	starting	quick	earth
press	staying	wear	twice
tire	unable	sure	music
ten	wanting	trunk	moved
wire	leaving	turn	wagon
zone	driver	news	visit
neat	marking	fail	wanted
witch	display	grain	thick
best	straight	few	watch
cedar	anyone	lead	sugar
term	rushed	march	does
draft	largely	used	worth
per	understanding	wise	would
inclosed	alley	crop	young
 

Standard Number of Errors
III. 8	III. 8	III. 10	III. 10
IV. 4	IV. 4	IV. 5	IV. 5
V. 2	V. 2	V. 2	V. 2
 

 

  9	 10	 11	 12 [Pg 34]
simple	heard	granted	should
carry	patch	seventh	sirs
learned	chop	raining	export
Sept.	heap	raised	suffer
shortly	stunt	rubber	paid
invited	front	sofa	ends
cared	velvet	dressed	hoops
lone	dearest	goose	tear
drill	render	death	rates
drug	thread	protest	grandpa
fruit	brain	cleaner	tooth
tile	ocean	trace	clip
dream	rented	chart	beach
leaves	ford	dozen	giving
pride	lame	packing	charge
renew	tend	month	opens
grown	sixth	wedding	steamer
partly	temple	cheer	event
pencil	handle	damp	soup
eighty	folder	removed	couch
 

Standard Number of Errors
III. 10	III. 10	III. 10	III. 10
IV. 5	IV. 5	IV. 5	IV. 5
V. 2	V. 2	V. 2	V. 2
 

 

 13	 14	 15	 16 [Pg 35]
started	battle	gladly	classes
bought	island	team	filling
branch	sooner	content	match
thankful	lesson	pillow	closed
change	mamma	travel	seventy
country	mighty	booklet	track
printing	moment	center	behalf
feeling	strongest	newspaper	calf
harvest	oldest	prevent	cotton
somewhere	unless	treat	grew
finish	trying	forme$1	inspect
welcome	o'clock	mostly	postage
ready	opening	range	pump
township	walked	awhile	coast
everyone	people	growing	holder
bathroom	person	keeping	western
weather	picture	bottle	army
together	getting	provide	leather
everything	good-night	bushel	merry
understand	September	quart	noise
 

Standard Number of Errors
III. 10	III. 10	III. 10	III. 11
IV. 5	IV. 5	IV. 5	IV. 5
V. 2	V. 2	V. 2	V. 2
 

 

 17	 18	 19	 20 [Pg 36]
station	member	company	income
brown	wrote	return	bankers
funny	agent	answer	bookcase
twelve	sometime	pleased	reports
coffee	between	remain	teapot
filled	follow	enough	undress
noted	uncle	amount	waken
plain	build	doctor	pancake
mailing	county	meeting	papers
otherwise	payment	fact	plaster
somewhat	whole	chance	defeat
itself	building	learn	inclose
pull	study	November	mess
kindness	vote	present	pulse
bleed	heavy	pretty	rake
hate	trusting	since	slice
labor	Thursday	through	toast
reached	chicken	busy	frozen
largest	selling	guess	bloom
scout	ticket	waited	climb
 

Standard Number of Errors
III. 11	III. 11	III. 11	III. 11
IV. 5	IV. 5	IV. 6	IV. 6
V. 2	V. 2	V. 3	V. 3
 

 

 21	 22	 23	 24 [Pg 37]
expert	fade	saving	gallon
poorly	knock	thousand	stair
tax	whip	value	excuse
turkey	causes	request	iron
understood	storage	afraid	exchange
zero	sudden	suit	demand
absent	noisy	hotel	hurry
moving	enclosed	idea	sale
named	ugly	program	figure
rack	windy	among	inform
retail	impress	fully	returned
sock	orders	August	wonderful
chapter	prison	cause	nicely
dread	replied	vacation	auto
household	charges	serve	valued
leaf	cracker	thirty	wished
cloudy	cupboard	intend	kitchen
dispose	dishes	anyway	sheet
farther	distant	everybody	duty
packed	eleven	hurt	plenty
 

Standard Number of Errors
III. 11	III. 12	III. 12	III. 12
IV. 7	IV. 7	IV. 7	IV. 7
V. 3	V. 3	V. 3	V. 3
 

 

 25	 26	 27	 28 [Pg 38]
rip	cheek	respect	fancy
steel	delight	voter	located
chill	awake	single	talked
joined	repair	anywhere	dealing
kisses	living	fresh	lower
knowing	power	higher	bonnet
reported	smaller	officer	spread
retain	nature	raw	running
treated	changed	title	branches
French	contain	improve	broken
jar	monthly	deliver	greater
learning	gain	liberty	provided
seal	court	proud	afterward
lamb	kindest	failed	anyhow
snap	offering	chain	elect
strongly	meantime	cleaned	gown
froze	wrong	dated	greeting
junk	grind	produce	honest
ordering	share	bugs	lung
circus	extent	locate	remind
 

Standard Number of Errors
III. 12	III. 12	III. 12	III. 12
IV. 7	IV. 7	IV. 7	IV. 7
V. 3	V. 3	V. 3	V. 3
 

 

 29	 30	 31	 32 [Pg 39]
owe	male	gem	plain
worm	most	tail	per
earn	melt	task	board
yoke	mode	tape	size
pearl	mood	lack	haul
offer	rural	thrown	tax
years	pear	through	wrote
heart	peas	toe	build
often	mouse	legal	whole
shirt	pests	tore	cast
hoped	sales	trim	stair
firms	scold	mental	sale
bail	seek	urged	beet
marry	shell	vest	pair
rainy	sneeze	booster	wear
silly	path	wipe	knew
fudge	jelly	yield	blew
broad	staid	manual	would
shine	stoves	boost	lone
equal	stuck	walnut	grown
 

Standard Number of Errors
III. 12	III. 13	III. 15	III. 11
IV. 7	IV. 8	IV. 9	IV. 5
V. 3	V. 4	V. 5	V. 2
 

 

 S-1	 S-2	 S-3	 S-4 [Pg 40]
shirts	tempt	ages	jolly
muddy	boy's	alarm	layer
skim	charm	amuse	breast
sky	faith	bitter	mince
slap	yards	blanks	legging
slick	bead	brine	dean
stack	grate	cabin	oyster
stands	socks	pages	pantry
steep	dates	Co.	parade
sting	yarn	drift	player
stool	wring	dies	wave
stoop	limp	empty	polish
strip	states	escape	puzzle
stump	stretch	floss	rules
tack	bruise	strap	saucer
tag	wreck	frank	scream
tease	peep	haul	screen
tune	peak	heaven	stag
ways	sketch	lard	steal
words	tact	lean	eighth
 

Standard Number of Errors
III. 10	III. 13	III. 15	III. 15
IV. 5	IV. 8	IV. 9	IV. 10
V. 2	V. 4	V. 5	V. 5
 

[Pg 41]

FIFTH GRADE

[Pg 42]

DIRECTIONS TO FIFTH GRADE TEACHERS

The minimum lessons for this grade are numbered from 1 to 32, and contain 620 new words of the minimum list. The lessons marked R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, are made up of words from the fourth grade lessons which are most frequently mispeled by fifth grade children. In addition to these eighty review words, there is one review lesson containing homonyms. There are also two supplementary lessons made up of words which are new but which are not so commonly used as those in the minimum list. As in preceding grades, these supplementary lessons are introduced in order to afford additional work for classes which finish the regular lessons before the end of the year. There are also two lessons containing names of the months, days of the week, and certain abbreviations.

Directions for Teaching.—Read carefully the suggestions on pages vii to xvi. Read also the suggestions to teachers of the first four grades. See to it that your pupils attack their lessons in an aggressive manner. The pupils in grade five do considerable work in written composition, so it will be well to watch very closely the errors made in such work. Have the pupils learn all words mispeled in their written work, using the same method as in their regular spelling lessons.

Remember that the lessons are arranged by weeks rather than by days. The work for each week consists of one advance column and one review column. The review column in each case is the fourth column preceding the advance work. That is, it is made up of a week's work one month old. For example, column 5 contains 20 new words to be learned in one week. During the same week, column 1 should be reviewed. The lesson for the first week consists of column 1, which is the advance lesson, and of column R 1, which is the review.

 

 R-1	 R-2	 R-3	 R-4 [Pg 43]
running	joined	wrong	broad
legal	tax	anyway	cleaned
mental	chapter	greater	eighty
process	dread	hurt	everybody
booster	farther	junk	froze
rural	fully	o'clock	fruit
manual	idea	ordering	granted
straight	inspect	anyhow	kindest
enroll	jar	blew	lamb
mamma	kitchen	chain	leaf
rainy	knowing	enclosed	liberty
owe	dealing	circus	living
French	expert	gallon	Mrs.
largely	frozen	greeting	neat
cedar	guess	opening	ocean
together	moment	noisy	officer
term	reached	retail	pencil
busy	remind	worm	pretty
gain	serve	afterward	program
intend	valued	among	provided
 

Standard Number of Errors
IV. 13	IV. 8	IV. 8	IV. 7
V. 8	V. 4	V. 4	V. 3
VI. 5	VI. 2	VI. 2	VI. 2
 

 

  1	  2	  3	  4 [Pg 44]
acting	charming	copy	shed
Bible	chum	wait	birth
closer	clever	edge	speed
crib	colt	won	odd
depending	drilling	brace	mass
glasses	earning	beef	youth
grandfather	flesh	enjoy	fuel
maple	formed	joke	worse
overlooked	globe	favor	hare
painted	hardware	until	loud
pending	joyful	peace	jaw
planted	lighting	reply	main
posted	likewise	frame	wage
printer	loaded	rough	tread
renting	lucky	family	score
stranger	painter	slipper	scale
tested	reaching	wishes	cure
trained	respond	united	rye
whereby	red	nerve	graze
candle	sash	caused	creep
 

Standard Number of Errors
IV. 5	IV. 7	IV. 7	IV. 8
V. 2	V. 3	V. 3	V. 4
VI. 1	VI. 2	VI. 2	VI. 2
 

 

  5	  6	  7	  8 [Pg 45]
scare	sore	diner	sewing
fifth	gas	burst	steady
hers	says	listen	dirty
ease	whom	powder	ivory
scrap	union	pitcher	turned
dose	women	voice	eager
throw	stuff	linen	bridge
tried	crazy	built	freeze
checks	tired	fixed	narrow
hasten	force	penny	refuse
chore	habit	liked	strike
notes	piano	taught	insist
scrub	cough	rapid	seemed
seems	nurse	finest	caught
Ave.	raise	dairy	valley
finds	ought	loyal	comply
bulbs	extra	devil	weary
grit	appear	organ	reduce
dodge	fourth	await	showed
weekly	button	blessed	angry
 

Standard Number of Errors
IV. 8	IV. 8	IV. 8	IV. 8
V. 4	V. 4	V. 4	V. 4
VI. 2	VI. 2	VI. 2	VI. 2
 

 

  9	 10	 11	 12 [Pg 46]
admire	needed	placing	eighteen
bundle	bottom	reaches	northern
runner	figured	somebody	thirteen
sentence	comfort	movement	amounting
shadow	throat	informed	withdraw
insure	stating	handsome	including
friendly	surface	inviting	industry
papered	foolish	contained	breaking
circle	carried	English	post-office
gaining	message	helpful	homestead
cooler	central	improved	workmanship
Easter	helped	changing	housekeeping
boiler	active	checking	handled
elbow	shoulder	intended	inclosing
enlarge	closing	visited	returning
formal	opened	dealings	settlement
regain	played	stamped	nevertheless
bracelet	covered	watching	language
amounts	damage	anybody	hereafter
charged	quickly	pavement	production
 

Standard Number of Errors
IV. 8	IV. 8	IV. 8	IV. 8
V. 4	V. 4	V. 4	V. 4
VI. 2	VI. 2	VI. 2	VI. 2
 

 

 13	 14	 15	 16 [Pg 47]
picnic	directed	detail	perfect
taxes	fitting	action	capital
raising	flavor	ladies	misplaced
repeat	products	latter	writing
cheaper	disposed	manage	subject
decline	recovered	parlor	furnish
lowest	discovered	degree	instead
cutting	checked	useful	advance
stopped	needle	reason	handling
proven	cheerful	season	daughter
latest	eleventh	writer	chairman
setting	deeply	second	requested
conduct	feeder	record	mountain
dancing	German	notice	potatoes
devoted	prevented	direct	answered
studies	suffering	cousin	contract
hence	crowded	enjoyed	treatment
skating	coasting	explain	delightful
drafts	divide	married	delivered
clearly	shower	highest	answering
 

Standard Number of Errors
IV. 8	IV. 8	IV. 8	IV. 8
V. 4	V. 4	V. 4	V. 4
VI. 2	VI. 2	VI. 2	VI. 2
 

 

 17	 18	 19	 20 [Pg 48]
sew	ordered	though	import
deer	factory	during	changes
join	middle	enclose	builder
daily	lonesome	address	mistake
prize	placed	perhaps	baseball
began	breakfast	providing	suitable
public	postal	ashamed	relations
color	beaten	cottage	appoint
field	extend	already	department
cheap	awaiting	express	nearer
prove	package	Saturday	months
chest	history	greatest	expect
waist	obtain	delighted	preach
kept	square	shipment	proved
known	finished	painting	cheese
judge	fifteen	pleasure	sleepy
settle	waiting	trouble	frankly
woman	invite	several	prices
dealer	orange	training	poultry
health	require	slippery	writer's
 

Standard Number of Errors
IV. 8	IV. 8	IV. 8	IV. 10
V. 4	V. 4	V. 4	V. 5
VI. 2	VI. 2	VI. 2	VI. 3
 

 

 21	 22	 23	 24 [Pg 49]
buyer	begun	length	ribbon
proof	buggy	normal	adjust
spare	sleet	barrel	notion
apply	topic	begged	quoted
bluff	chose	submit	unpaid
waste	admit	borrow	employ
coach	slept	barley	winner
honor	upper	weight	famous
claim	credit	bigger	gained
ample	attend	collar	recess
lodge	supply	gotten	served
blaze	result	object	namely
level	secure	sleeve	sorrow
aware	couple	debate	misses
filing	advice	animal	voting
shock	dainty	cities	agreed
owned	profit	beauty	offers
actor	regret	lonely	artist
worst	permit	beyond	factor
acted	buying	loving	recite
 

Standard Number of Errors
IV. 10	IV. 10	IV. 10	IV. 10
V. 5	V. 5	V. 5	V. 5
VI. 3	VI. 3	VI. 3	VI. 3
 

 

 25	 26	 27	 28 [Pg 50]
points	truly	bond	lbs.
roast	account	sign	bulk
soak	feel	fee	Tues.
thumb	quite	quit	germ
warn	regard	view	solo
bathe	suppose	aid	local
blouse	advise	loss	skirt
cloud	to-morrow	diet	worry
friends	desire	fund	pupil
gorge	further	text	quiet
plait	enclosing	aim	break
stew	question	base	owner
strain	acre	grip	fever
stroll	balance	duet	owing
wealth	else	film	shown
guard	hoping	gravy	crowd
juice	except	limb	model
kegs	statement	lazy	touch
lease	minute	bowl	weigh
stitch	oblige	knot	clerk
 

Standard Number of Errors
IV. 9	IV. 10	IV. 10	IV. 10
V. 5	V. 5	V. 5	V. 5
VI. 3	VI. 3	VI. 3	VI. 3
 

 

 29	 30	 31	 32 [Pg 51]
saddle	husband	deserve	Sunday
fitted	parties	illness	Monday
insert	putting	neglect	Tuesday
backed	invoice	reduced	Wednesday
baking	obliged	sitting	Thursday
struck	evident	stories	Friday
forward	product	excited	Saturday
against	matters	letting	January
written	climate	breathe	February
machine	primary	needing	March
careful	delayed	offices	April
student	fashion	captain	May
greatly	rapidly	percent	June
quarter	noticed	blossom	July
correct	plainly	fullest	August
lecture	elected	renewed	September
holiday	butcher	serving	October
include	example	silence	November
pattern	reserve	uniform	December
measure	soldier	although	Christmas
 

Standard Number of Errors
IV. 10	IV. 10	IV. 10	IV. 5
V. 5	V. 5	V. 5	V. 2
VI. 3	VI. 3	VI. 3	VI. 1
 

 

 33	 34	 S-1	 S-2 [Pg 52]
Sun.	feet	fireman	acres
Mon.	needed	solve	argue
Tues.	main	stable	border
Wed.	weigh	starve	mason
Thurs.	weight	stiff	acid
Fri.	freeze	stingy	China
Sat.	grip	switch	civil
Jan.	birth	tablet	harm
Feb.	won	undo	false
Aug.	sewing	unpack	acute
Sept.	base	verse	deny
Oct.	break	grocer	shove
Nov.	prize	whisper	envy
Dec.	peace	clothes	feat
Co.	waste	drawing	tool
Dr.	shown	happens	attic
Mr.	waist	pretend	voted
Mrs.	fourth	groom	muddy
St.	capital	olive	shave
Ave.	wait	launch	veal
 

Standard Number of Errors
IV. 5	IV. 9	IV. 9	IV. 9
V. 2	V. 6	V. 6	V. 6
VI. 1	VI. 3	VI. 3	VI. 3
 

[Pg 53]

SIXTH GRADE

[Pg 54]

DIRECTIONS TO SIXTH GRADE TEACHERS

The advance lessons numbered 1 to 32 inclusive contain 640 new words. The supplementary list containing 80 new words is meant for schools which, because of the long term or for other reasons, finish the minimum list of words before the end of the year. The lessons marked R-l, R-2, R-3, R-4, are made up of 80 words in the fifth grade list which are most commonly mispeled by sixth grade children.

Directions for Teaching.—Read the preface and study with particular care the suggestions given on pages vii to xvi. It would be well also to read the suggestions given to teachers of the first five grades. Give particular attention to the correction of all written work.

Remember that the lessons are arranged by weeks rather than by days. The work for each week consists of one advance column and one review column. The review column in each case is the fourth column preceding the advance work. That is, it is made up of a week's work one month old. For example, column 5 contains 20 new words to be learned in one week. During the same week, column 1 should be reviewed. The lesson for the first week consists of column 1, which is the advance lesson, and of column R 1, which is the review.

 

 R-1	 R-2	 R-3	 R-4 [Pg 55]
fund	pattern	buying	advise
habit	caught	fee	collar
owing	writing	invoice	fever
parties	buyer	oblige	quarter
proof	couple	opened	to-morrow
pupil	forward	rough	its
quiet	gotten	scrap	hoping
sigh	voting	aid	measure
until	minute	crazy	owing
barrel	needed	enclosing	level
clerk	question	greatly	obliged
color	sew	grip	putting
dealer	throw	loss	regard
handling	although	ought	touch
husband	ample	picnic	truly
model	quite	profit	weigh
parlor	breakfast	shown	loving
placing	delayed	break	crowd
though	feel	explain	further
account	fourth	shock	waste
 

Standard Number of Errors
V. 5	V. 6	V. 7	V. 8
VI. 3	VI. 4	VI. 4	VI. 5
VII. 1	VII. 2	VII. 2	VII. 3
 

 

  1	  2	  3	  4 [Pg 56]
delivery	entering	improving	accept
election	dreadful	performed	herewith
continue	dwelling	crippled	attack
property	boarding	requesting	barrels
prospect	following	increasing	cactus
shipping	gentleman	investment	destroy
standard	perfectly	throughout	pepper
enjoying	Wednesday	explained	errand
properly	directory	addresses	flowers
visiting	intention	regulation	grower
relation	happened	containing	nicer
promised	reduction	furnishing	fabric
headache	attending	forwarding	lemon
required	countries	friendship	olives
gasoline	obtained	yourselves	peaches
nineteen	enjoyment	deportment	places
southern	expressed	Thanksgiving Day	mitten
frighten	presented	headquarter	regards
fourteen	extending	relationship	sandy
outlined	traveling	collections	cooky
 

Standard Number of Errors
V. 5	V. 5	V. 5	V. 5
VI. 3	VI. 3	VI. 3	VI. 3
VII. 1	VII. 1	VII. 1	VII. 2
 

 

  5	  6	  7	  8 [Pg 57]
polite	million	problem	wired
foggy	total	included	exact
samples	duties	private	humor
secured	payable	expected	issue
sections	cigar	advising	moral
severe	final	furnished	bury
melons	polls	foundation	royal
twelfth	carrier	geography	sunny
escort	worthy	companion	curly
buttons	pastor	location	appeal
cabbage	modern	directly	common
canon	watched	progress	assist
consent	feature	refreshment	entire
insects	collect	extended	notify
jealous	jury	conversation	period
laundry	refused	promotion	burner
listed	ideal	adventure	caller
pickle	burden	expecting	concert
publish	fortune	protected	carbon
hinges	female	concluded	memory
 

Standard Number of Errors
V. 5	V. 5	V. 5	V. 6
VI. 3	VI. 3	VI. 3	VI. 4
VII. 2	VII. 2	VII. 2	VII. 2
 

 

  9	 10	 11	 12 [Pg 58]
chilly	personal	encourage	loam
presume	reliable	factories	dirt
regular	absolute	inspector	berth
special	approved	neglected	due
advised	attended	ourselves	piece
arrived	commerce	president	loan
certain	consider	reception	firm
connect	honestly	situation	lose
justify	increase	instruction	ache
liberal	interest	collection	whose
musical	moderate	composition	fault
natural	prepared	connecting	passed
quality	suffered	connection	taste
baggage	charging	consideration	loose
bidding	resulting	construction	lime
educate	appointed	correction	wrap
happily	corrected	difference	terms
seasons	correctly	instructed	ditch
credits	dangerous	particular	loans
instruct	direction	departments	pity
 

Standard Number of Errors
V. 6	V. 6	V. 6	V. 7
VI. 4	VI. 4	VI. 4	VI. 4
VII. 2	VII. 2	VII. 2	VII. 2
 

 

 13	 14	 15	 16 [Pg 59]
queer	important	debating	entirely
growth	prepare	gentlemen	automobile
tight	inquire	believe	effort
fare	item	attention	section
chief	lately	information	maybe
forced	beautiful	service	arrange
group	according	future	prompt
booth	depot	remember	addressed
ninth	forty	condition	recently
smooth	hospital	replying	promptly
guide	offered	interested	carefully
calm	hello	either	allow
scarce	channel	advantage	district
debts	favorable	different	promise
strict	February	general	instant
crew	curtain	therefore	surprise
fern	mentioned	regarding	mention
bass	using	arrive	education
billed	stayed	success	complete
braid	fairly	forenoon	neighbor
 

Standard Number of Errors
V. 7	V. 7	V. 7	V. 7
VI. 4	VI. 4	VI. 4	VI. 4
VII. 2	VII. 2	VII. 2	VII. 2
 

 

 17	 18	 19	 20 [Pg 60]
alter	chapel	desired	tanning
reset	closet	domestic	weighed
gross	seldom	prepaid	hurried
trial	parent	furnace	minister
knows	refund	dentist	supplied
limit	cement	entitle	division
idle	custom	popular	conclude
towel	poetry	average	preacher
human	apiece	settled	visitors
amply	hereby	bedroom	complain
berry	seller	entered	constant
ankle	utmost	failure	current
ruin	approve	healthy	rendered
abroad	boarder	sixteen	director
manner	brokers	expects	shopping
retire	harmony	sweater	produced
tickle	sleeper	leading	creamery
govern	justice	ironing	exciting
potato	observe	wearing	blooming
garage	outlook	receive	cherries
 

Standard Number of Errors
V. 7	V. 7	V. 7	V. 7
VI. 4	VI. 4	VI. 4	VI. 4
VII. 2	VII. 2	VII. 2	VII. 2
 

 

 21	 22	 23	 24 [Pg 61]
remained	vacant	cases	assure
mountains	elope	aloud	easily
neighbors	insult	simply	recent
wondering	deem	cellar	effect
publisher	width	method	volume
agreeable	facts	tongue	system
machinery	hymn	sleigh	social
oversight	ideas	height	spirit
directors	remit	select	avenue
preparing	avoid	toward	author
addressing	rifle	violin	prayer
durable	drama	camera	excess
convention	adopt	wander	liquid
pertaining	bacon	occurs	search
considering	satin	fasten	hungry
reputation	motor	enable	others
permission	avail	secret	league
blackberries	arise	relief	surely
explaining	apron	parcel	highly
remembering	sweat	likely	compare
 

Standard Number of Errors
V. 7	V. 8	V. 8	V. 8
VI. 4	VI. 5	VI. 5	VI. 5
VII. 2	VII. 2	VII. 2	VII. 2
 

 

 25	 26	 27	 28 [Pg 62]
engine	propose	citizen	adjusted
safely	efforts	capable	soreness
poison	thunder	applied	umbrella
desert	useless	courage	landlady
decent	possible	grammar	freshman
corset	cashier	prevail	position
gloomy	manager	expired	national
tomato	decided	affairs	circular
relating	absence	portion	purchase
theater	support	squeeze	relative
earnest	proceed	reunion	graduate
biggest	concern	journey	supplies
consist	neither	disturb	telegram
closely	limited	fearful	discounts
grocery	ability	gallery	commence
adopted	assured	instance	indicate
colored	attempt	addition	attached
tickled	favored	advanced	maintain
shipper	federal	attain	arranged
cabinet	funeral	confined	hesitate
 

Standard Number of Errors
V. 8	V. 8	V. 8	V. 8
VI. 5	VI. 5	VI. 5	VI. 5
VII. 2	VII. 2	VII. 2	VII. 2
 

 

 29	 30	 31	 32 [Pg 63]
calves	attacked	invest	New York
choice	backward	lettuce	Chicago
clothe	commands	shipments	Philadelphia
stalk	carriage	mileage	Cleveland
debt	catarrh	questions	Detroit
doubt	combine	muslin	St. Louis
ghost	composed	nearest	Boston
guest	compared	chickens	Baltimore
laid	condemned	occurred	Pittsburg
missed	consult	onions	Los Angeles
priced	culture	oppose	Buffalo
tract	details	eastern	Milwaukee
route	dismiss	pamphlets	Minneapolis
shipped	materials	partner	Newark
signed	fiction	persons	New Orleans
slight	goodness	persuade	San Francisco
style	forever	procure	Seattle
canned	careless	purple	Washington
course	granite	quarrel	Cincinnati
ere	sprinkle	scarcely	Portland
 

Standard Number of Errors
V. 8	V. 9	V. 9	V. ( )
VI. 5	VI. 6	VI. 6	VI. ( )
VII. 2	VII. 3	VII. 3	VII. ( )
 

 

 S-1	 S-2	 S-3	 S-4 [Pg 64]
accent	quinine	kodak	affect
members	railway	angel	ashore
counter	remains	burial	lemonade
affords	sailor	ceiling	attempts
bearing	session	offend	basement
Europe	solely	paragraph	behave
confine	subjects	proceeds	blister
garnet	suburb	quartet	bloomers
griddle	tackle	reasons	camping
hammer	tartar	diameter	caved
humble	wherein	sandwich	copied
induce	homely	suite	driving
judging	combined	surround	dropped
ignore	relate	suspect	dizzy
mixture	ditches	tour	dollars
outcome	forage	traveler	darkness
packers	grapevines	housekeeper	daytime
precious	lying	wholly	fallen
pronounce	major	vinegar	farmers
proposed	injury	carload	finely
 

Standard Number of Errors
V. 9	V. 11	V. 11	V. 8
VI. 6	VI. 8	VI. 8	VI. 5
VII. 3	VII. 5	VII. 5	VII. 2
 

[Pg 65]

SEVENTH GRADE

[Pg 66]

DIRECTIONS TO SEVENTH GRADE TEACHERS

The minimum lessons for this grade are numbered from 1 to 30 inclusive and contain 600 new words. The supplementary lessons contain 60 new words which are not so commonly used as those in the minimum lessons. As in preceding grades, these supplementary lessons are introduced in order to afford additional work for classes which finish the regular lessons before the end of the year. The lessons marked R-l, R-2, R-3, R-4, are made up of words from the sixth grade lessons which are most frequently mispeled by seventh grade children.

Directions for Teaching.—Read carefully the suggestions on pages vii to xvi. Read also the suggestions to teachers in the first six grades. As in grades four, five and six, the spelling errors found in pupils' compositions should be rigorously corrected.

Remember that the lessons are arranged by weeks rather than by days. The work for each week consists of one advance column and one review column. The review column in each case is the fourth column preceding the advance work. That is, it is made up of a week's work one month old. For example, column 5 contains 20 new words to be learned in one week. During the same week, column 1 should be reviewed. The lesson for the first week consists of column 1, which is the advance lesson, and of column R 1, which is the review.

 

 R-1	 R-2	 R-3	 R-4 [Pg 67]
decided	easily	interested	lose
either	instant	likely	clothe
extended	neither	delivery	missed
favored	mention	doubt	Dr.
hospital	remit	fern	shipped
relative	replying	item	strict
piece	perfectly	loose	choice
queer	purchase	mentioned	maintain
system	surprise	passed	February
telegram	absence	spirit	maybe
Wednesday	circular	supplies	using
ache	graduate	support	ability
believe	instance	toward	nineteen
consist	manager	accept	choose
favorable	receive	addressed	moral
growth	particular	attempt	regarding
indicate	supplied	assured	stayed
lately	tight	biggest	course
limited	cashier	cellar	forenoon
minister	fabric	concern	hello
 

Standard Number of Errors
VI. 5	VI. 5	VI. 7	VI. 8
VII. 3	VII. 3	VII. 4	VII. 5
VIII. 2	VIII. 2	VIII. 2	VIII. 3
 

 

  1	  2	  3 [Pg 68]
slightly	forgotten	extensive
appeared	represent	quotation
assembly	complaint	seventeen
selected	youngster	effective
struggle	nightgown	interests
supposed	certainly	patent
enrolled	satisfied	comfortable
procured	increased	instructive
followed	selection	improvement
restless	accomplish	considered
internal	doubtless	importance
accounts	entertain	reasonable
contents	advertise	interesting
distance	forwarded	republican
describe	justified	themselves
overalls	published	represented
presents	treasurer	circulation
gathered	connected	subscriber
availing	difficult	appointment
gratitude	described	expression
 

Standard Number of Errors
VI. 5	VI. 5	VI. 5
VII. 3	VII. 3	VII. 3
VIII. 2	VIII. 2	VIII. 2
 

 

  4	  5	  6 [Pg 69]
attraction	bride	whether
adjustment	awful	anxious
federation	usual	realize
introduction	Prof.	patient
remembered	refer	banquet
introduced	gland	exactly
graduation	decide	nervous
manufacture	error	suggest
connections	madam	expense
educational	salary	society
frightened	broker	article
quotations	copies	library
approached	policy	thereto
entertainment	really	junior
stockholders	actual	opinion
considerable	design	inasmuch
publication	college	arrival
satisfaction	affair	deposit
transportation	pardon	salesman
international	purpose	securing
 

Standard Number of Errors
VI. 5	VI. 7	VI. 7
VII. 3	VII. 4	VII. 4
VIII. 2	VIII. 2	VIII. 2
 

 

  7	  8	  9 [Pg 70]
favors	exercise	balances
pudding	material	contemplate
uneasy	medicine	handkerchief
accuse	knowledge	neighborhood
discuss	splendid	installed
occur	valuable	surprised
entry	establish	dependent
cartoon	purchased	distribute
studied	argument	apartment
figuring	lovingly	services
motion	carrying	depositors
Bro.	accident	establishing
therein	bicycle	conditions
attach	customer	observation
writers	received	passenger
awaken	situated	requirements
stylish	arriving	destroyed
matron	earliest	possibly
drawer	happiness	underwear
porter	continued	conclusion
 

Standard Number of Errors
VI. 7	VI. 7	VI. 7
VII. 4	VII. 4	VII. 4
VIII. 2	VIII. 2	VIII. 2
 

 

 10	 11	 12 [Pg 71]
fierce	territory	orchard
freight	character	suggesting
haste	prefer	acquaint
hauled	description	approach
heir	operation	biscuit
niece	commercial	canoe
strength	democrat	bungalow
quote	finally	consumption
source	available	cultivate
brief	accordance	interview
choir	confidence	review
coarse	develop	ruffle
meant	etc.	trolley
mere	fortunate	engage
sense	satisfy	ferry
herein	receiving	thereafter
type	entitled	prospects
based	generally	Pres.
urge	expensive	transactions
grippe	previous	altitude
 

Standard Number of Errors
VI. 8	VI. 8	VI. 8
VII. 5	VII. 5	VII. 5
VIII. 3	VIII. 3	VIII. 3
 

 

 13	 14	 15 [Pg 72]
evidently	qualities	signature
instructor	substitute	ordinary
literary	compelled	relieve
applicant	formerly	influence
impose	honorable	government
thereof	instrument	investigation
enrollment	politics	series
genuine	choosing	afford
believing	electrical	favorably
constitution	transit	attorney
disposal	authorized	journal
extreme	contemplated	institute
lining	estimated	candidate
personality	identify	merchandise
prosperous	letters	distribution
tatting	mercantile	similar
blizzard	worrying	exhibit
cushion	disgusted	considerably
equally	realizing	renewal
gradually	admission	succeed
 

Standard Number of Errors
VI. 8	VI. 8	VI. 9
VII. 5	VII. 5	VII. 6
VIII. 3	VIII. 3	VIII. 4
 

 

 16	 17	 18 [Pg 73]
strictly	barely	assistant
studying	engineering	industrial
elsewhere	orchestra	sirup
lading	crocheting	arrangements
impression	illustrated	inquiry
announce	succeeded	auction
development	exclusively	appreciated
explanation	supervisor	principal
sincere	civics	usually
stationary	criticize	circumstances
confer	attitude	variety
jobber	congratulate	presence
transact	electricity	practical
decision	existing	assistance
moisture	prosperity	equipment
administration	talent	registration
employee	appearance	duplicate
excitement	inquiries	particularly
acceptance	planned	absolutely
organize	athletics	basis
 

Standard Number of Errors
VI. 9	VI. 10	VI. 10
VII. 6	VII. 7	VII. 7
VIII. 4	VIII. 4	VIII. 4
 

 

 19	 20	 21 [Pg 74]
business	practice	safety
pleasant	beginning	unusual
appreciate	experience	surplus
necessary	acknowledge	typhoid
probably	benefit	coupon
receipt	subscription	disagreeable
sincerely	awfully	heretofore
opportunity	secretary	welfare
inst.	successful	assurance
proposition	premium	auditor
foreign	magazine	exceptional
institution	association	assignment
examination	certificate	confirm
university	commission	possession
imagine	excellent	attendance
additional	literature	demonstration
alfalfa	annual	assume
terrible	organization	correspond
separate	remittance	goodbye
envelope	arrangement	consequently
 

Standard Number of Errors
VI. 10	VI. 10	VI. 10
VII. 7	VII. 7	VII. 7
VIII. 4	VIII. 4	VIII. 5
 

 

 22	 23	 24 [Pg 75]
privilege	readily	recommend
guarantee	vicinity	definite
rheumatism	corporation	correspondence
guaranteed	crochet	courtesy
schedule	assigned	judgment
data	ninety	courteous
Latin	sympathy	thoroughly
majority	disease	Chautauqua
suggested	planning	efficiency
control	advisable	approval
established	original	senior
Christian	merely	furniture
operating	practically	regularly
patron	science	contemplating
religious	advertisement	difficulty
altogether	semester	issued
bargain	quantity	profession
engineer	response	allowed
responsible	capacity	examine
situated	catalogue	glorious
 

Standard Number of Errors
VI. 11	VI. 11	VI. 12
VII. 8	VII. 8	VII. 9
VIII. 5	VIII. 5	VIII. 6
 

 

 25	 26	 27 [Pg 76]
certified	associated	custard
dismissal	timothy	double
develops	accomplished	resign
estimate	tendency	panel
heavily	confirming	pamphlet
horrible	congratulation	familiar
obligate	illustrating	sermon
traffic	meter	hustle
trifle	reliability	janitor
exceed	resource	occupy
finance	examiner	warehouse
overdo	demonstrated	envelop
residence	carnival	preside
camphor	conservatory	scholar
discussion	consultation	museum
galvanized	enormous	methods
interrupt	legislation	patience
intimate	maturity	fundamental
luncheon	nickel	accredited
mattress	manufacturing	continuous
 

Standard Number of Errors
VI. 11	VI. 11	VI. 12
VII. 8	VII. 8	VII. 8
VIII. 5	VIII. 5	VIII. 5
 

 

 28	 29	 30 [Pg 77]
adapted	buried	rhubarb
almonds	marked	initials
analyze	foliage	confidential
capitol	heading	irrigate
faculty	locally	mutually
formula	luxury	engaged
mutual	medium	Vice Pres.
nursery	quietly	circulars
quoting	rabbits	exercised
salad	razor	childhood
scenery	refers	vegetable
tobacco	reverse	packages
towards	shining	terribly
opera	solid	desirable
urgent	survey	determine
via	turkeys	shortage
visitor	visits	rainfall
widow	vomit	wherever
accompany	wasted	fertilizers
apricot	confess	adequate
 

Standard Number of Errors
VI. 10	VI. 9	VI. 10
VII. 7	VII. 6	VII. 7
VIII. 4	VIII. 3	VIII. 4
 

 

 S-1	 S-2	 S-3 [Pg 78]
items	willow	muscle
honey	gospel	guilty
stormy	wisdom	soldiers
stupid	naughty	handles
negro	slowly	hearty
tailor	expand	helper
sire	arises	somehow
rally	sewed	raisin
toilet	murder	jewels
tower	miner	napkin
unload	holy	dessert
upset	vigor	lessons
utter	lawyer	marble
vice	crown	scatter
vessel	vague	millers
wages	votes	minded
warmly	yacht	roomer
repay	cable	earlier
mercy	create	remarks
whistle	ladder	kindle
 

Standard Number of Errors
VI. 7	VI. 7	VI. 7
VII. 4	VII. 4	VII. 4
VIII. 2	VIII. 2	VIII. 2
 

[Pg 79]

EIGHTH GRADE

[Pg 80]

DIRECTIONS TO EIGHTH GRADE TEACHERS

The minimum lessons for this grade are numbered from 1 to 25 inclusive, and contain 500 new words. There are in addition 240 supplementary words which are new, but which are not so frequently used as those in the minimum list. The four lessons marked R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, are made up of those words in the preceding grades which are most frequently missed by eighth grade students. The lesson marked "Special Review," contains the hardest words, of the two thousand most frequently used in correspondence.

In addition, there are four letters which should be given as dictation exercises. These letters contain a large number of words which are very likely to be mispeled, as shown by their frequency of use in correspondence and the percentage of error of eighth grade pupils who attempt to spell them.

Remember that the lessons are arranged by weeks rather than by days. The work for each week consists of one advance column and one review column. The review column in each case is the fourth column preceding the advance work. That is, it is made up of a week's work one month old. For example, column 5 contains 20 new words to be learned in one week. During the same week, column 1 should be reviewed. The lesson for the first week consists of column 1, which is the advance lesson, and of column R 1, which is the review.

 

 R-1	 R-2	 R-3 [Pg 81]
Chautauqua	planning	separate
schedule	remittance	advisable
guaranteed	probably	awfully
rheumatism	sincerely	disease
privilege	arrangement	sense
efficiency	considerably	familiar
inst.	capacity	merely
judgment	corporation	presence
recommend	usually	receiving
thoroughly	choir	similar
correspondence	inquiry	variety
courteous	renewal	crochet
semester	alfalfa	imagine
practically	basis	organization
opportunity	benefit	successful
literature	catalogue	sympathy
absolutely	excellent	appreciated
receipt	necessary	assigned
definite	quantity	assistant
guarantee	response	pleasant
 

Standard Number of Errors
VI. 15	VI. 13	VI. 12
VII. 12	VII. 9	VII. 8
VIII. 9	VIII. 6	VIII. 5
 

 

 R-4	  1	  2 [Pg 82]
relieve	convince	reference
surprised	transfer	companies
appreciate	independent	discourage
assistance	investigate	insurance
candidate	wholesale	inclined
certificate	democratic	organized
distribution	employer	ambition
magazine	exception	attractive
principal	confident	credited
readily	advertised	notified
registration	constantly	operated
commission	manufacturer	worried
equipment	sanitary	automatic
exhibit	submitted	accord
nervous	liable	frequently
practical	evidence	management
regularly	concerning	generous
succeed	assuring	involved
uneasy	positive	misunderstanding
duplicate	superior	representation
 

Standard Number of Errors
VI. 10	VI. 7	VI. 7
VII. 7	VII. 4	VII. 4
VIII. 4	VIII. 2	VIII. 2
 

 

  3	  4	  5 [Pg 83]
invitation	contrary	abstract
celebrate	entertaining	employed
discontinued	examined	register
respectfully	profitable	resident
obligation	registered	vision
occupied	reservation	favorite
application	universal	nephew
accordingly	requirement	regardless
collecting	deliveries	satisfactory
convinced	desiring	serious
destination	conference	Hallowe'en
agriculture	strawberries	pneumonia
fashionable	advancement	appendicitis
combination	decrease	ingredients
resigned	deserved	phosphorus
membership	triumph	telephone
supervision	graduating	temperature
clause	hustling	possibilities
activity	numerous	temptation
impossible	raiser	constructed
 

Standard Number of Errors
VI. 7	VI. 7	VI. 10
VII. 4	VII. 4	VII. 7
VIII. 2	VIII. 2	VIII. 4
 

 

  6	  7	  8 [Pg 84]
Pullman	librarian	superintendent
cistern	agricultural	occasion
customers	announcement	representative
sight-seeing	completely	possibility
warrant	ballot	all right
acknowledged	coöperative	especially
electric	cordial	committee
borrowers	inferior	immediately
circumstance	preliminary	analysis
opposite	disappointed	bulletin
edition	physical	mortgage
excursion	exceptionally	referred
patronage	annually	referring
professor	exhausted	convenience
restaurant	responsibility	allotment
commencement	algebra	installment
chaperon	executive	advertising
thesis	permanent	administrator
possess	soliciting	straightened
physician	alumni	epidemic
 

Standard Number of Errors
VI. 12	VI. 12	VI. 13
VII. 8	VII. 9	VII. 10
VIII. 5	VIII. 6	VIII. 7
 

 

  9	 10	 11 [Pg 85]
vary	specially	ambitions
duly	extremely	appreciation
leisure	calendar	communication
acquire	originally	commissioner
agency	official	exhibition
immense	candidacy	mechanical
hastily	extension	specification
various	naturally	consequence
unlock	cordially	disappoint
solicit	customary	remembrance
medical	campaign	authority
license	financial	appreciating
client	associate	interfere
Sabbath	acquainted	sufficient
injure	personally	coöperating
stomach	immediate	relieved
notary	esteemed	coöperation
surgery	executed	anticipate
losing	postscript	preparation
council	convenient	satisfactorily
 

Standard Number of Errors
VI. 15	VI. 13	VI. 13
VII. 10	VII. 10	VII. 10
VIII. 6	VIII. 7	VIII. 7
 

 

 12	 13	 14 [Pg 86]
individual	bonus	patronize
actually	unusually	probably
merit	disappointment	reverend
fertilize	X-ray	manufactured
necessity	canvass	typewriter
community	enthusiasm	enclosure
bureau	accompanying	illustrate
grateful	tuberculosis	preserve
correspondent	politician	opportune
quantities	anticipating	appetite
thorough	characteristic	bronchitis
compliment	anniversary	discussed
geometry	zephyr	privileged
regretting	peculiarities	courtesies
equipped	assortment	desirous
prior	illustration	promenade
efficient	inducement	strenuous
affectionately	label	kimono
lieutenant	practicing	ultimo
fraternally	amendment	aggravate
 

Standard Number of Errors
VI. 14	VI. 14	VI. 15
VII. 10	VII. 11	VII. 12
VIII. 7	VIII. 8	VIII. 8
 

 

 15	 16	 17 [Pg 87]
principle	articles	decomposed
professional	bachelor	developing
circuit	benefits	embroidery
acquaintance	infected	employment
scientific	minimum	enjoyable
inconvenience	miserable	immensely
enthusiastic	objection	experiment
recd.	opinions	facilities
assessment	sidewalk	gardening
materially	stopping	inventory
recommendation	tomatoes	irrigation
supplement	treasure	mentioning
confirmation	vineyard	memorandum
occasionally	advantages	measuring
apparatus	asparagus	officials
essential	carpenter	operations
unnecessary	casseroles	previously
accommodate	catalogues	proportion
affidavit	comfortably	specimens
definitely	temporary	spineless
 

Standard Number of Errors
VI. 15	VI. 12	VI. 12
VII. 13	VII. 8	VII. 8
VIII. 9	VIII. 5	VIII. 5
 

 

 18	 19	 20 [Pg 88]
cafeteria	accommodation	nowadays
squirrels	accommodations	steadily
straighten	acknowledging	butter-fat
substantial	acknowledgment	contented
suggestion	advantageous	conveyance
twenty-five	anticipation	scholarship
undertake	communications	coöperate
communicate	financially	cucumbers
complement	incidentally	everywhere
continually	kindergarten	impatient
conveniently	manufacturers	inquiring
unpleasant	preliminaries	missionary
unfortunate	solicitation	organizing
institutions	undoubtedly	positively
progressive	beautifully	sometimes
prospective	presentation	separately
publications	remittances	sediments
gymnasium	unfortunately	rosebushes
memorandums	unexpected	rheumatic
uncomfortable	vice president	correspondents
 

Standard Number of Errors
VI. 12	VI. 13	VI. 12
VII. 8	VII. 10	VII. 9
VIII. 5	VIII. 7	VIII. 6
 

 

 	 21	 	 22 [Pg 89]
Ala.	(Alabama)	Md.	(Maryland)
Alaska	 	Mass.	(Massachusetts)
Ariz.	(Arizona)	Mich.	(Michigan)
Ark.	(Arkansas)	Minn.	(Minnesota)
Cal.	(California)	Miss.	(Mississippi)
Colo.	(Colorado)	Mo.	(Missouri)
Conn.	(Connecticut)	Mont.	(Montana)
Del.	(Delaware)	Nebr.	(Nebraska)
D. C.	(District of	Nev.	(Nevada)
 	  Columbia)	N. H.	(New Hampshire)
Fla.	(Florida)	N. J.	(New Jersey)
Ga.	(Georgia)	N. Mex.	(New Mexico)
Hawaii	 	N. Y.	(New York)
Idaho	 	N. C.	(North Carolina)
Ill.	(Illinois)	N. Dak.	(North Dakota)
Ind.	(Indiana)	Ohio	 
Iowa	 	Okla.	(Oklahoma)
Kans.	(Kansas)	Oregon	 
Ky.	(Kentucky)	Pa.	(Pennsylvania)
La.	(Louisiana)	R. I.	(Rhode Island)
Me.	(Maine)	 	 
 

Standard Number of Errors
VI. ( )	VI. ( )
VII. ( )	VII. ( )
VIII. ( )	VIII. ( )
 

 

 	 23	 	 24 [Pg 90]
S. C.	(South Carolina)	A. M.	(Forenoon)
S. Dak.	(South Dakota)	Agt.	(Agent)
Tenn.	(Tennessee)	Assn.	(association)
Tex.	(Texas)	A1.	(First class)
Utah	 	 	 
Vt.	(Vermont)	bbl.	(barrel)
Va.	(Virginia)	bbls.	(barrels)
Wash.	(Washington)	bldg.	(building)
W. Va.	(West Virginia)	bu.	(bushel)
Wis.	(Wisconsin)	Capt.	(Captain)
Wyo.	(Wyoming)	C.O.D.	(Collect on
Cuba	 	 	Delivery)
Philippine Islands	 	¢; ct.	(cent)
Porto Rico	 	cr.	(credit)
Co.	(Company or	cwt.	(hundredweight)
 	County)	doz.	(dozen)
Messrs. (Gentlemen)		gal.	(gallon)
R.F.D.	(Rural Free	ft.	(foot or feet)
 	Delivery)	F.O.B.	(Free on Board)
 	 	Hon.	(Honorable)
acct.	(account)	i.e.	(that is)
Dr.	(Doctor or debtor)	N. B.	(take notice)
Treas.	(Treasurer)	 	 
 

Standard Number of Errors
VI. ( )	VI. ( )
VII. ( )	VII. ( )
VIII. ( )	VIII. ( )
 

 

 	 25	 Special Review [Pg 91]
Jour.	(Journal)	Chautauqua
in.	(inch or inches)	fraternally
mdse.	(merchandise)	schedule
ass't	(assistant)	guaranteed
Jr.	(Junior)	privilege
Mdlle.	(Mademoiselle)	affectionately
mfg.	(manufacturing)	guarantee
oz.	(ounces)	rheumatism
sec'y	(secretary)	judgment
pkg.	(package)	efficiency
pr.	(pair)	recommend
pd.	(paid)	referred
P. M.	(afternoon)	disappoint
mgr.	(manager)	immediately
P. S.	(postscript)	referring
pub.	(publisher)	equipped
qt.	(quart)	grateful
St.	(Saint or street)	bulletin
Supt.	(superintendent)	all right
viz.	(namely)	mortgage
 

Standard Number of Errors
VI. ( )	VI. (16)
VII. ( )	VII. (13)
VIII. ( )	VIII. (10)
 

 

 S-1	 S-2	 S-3 [Pg 92]
descend	postpone	resources
necktie	political	respectable
swallow	elaborate	sentiment
nonsense	exporting	seriously
oatmeal	kidney	suddenly
wireless	locations	tablespoon
afloat	memorial	telegraph
tiresome	muscular	preparatory
horseback	negotiate	commencing
housework	peculiar	warranted
wealthy	unlikely	occupant
scarlet	purposes	performance
whiskers	readiness	physiology
scissors	recognize	bacteria
scramble	remaining	beginner
scribble	resemble	beneficial
sweetness	military	proportions
heaviest	blossoms	intentions
slippers	coloring	accustomed
accepted	chemical	opposition
 

Standard Number of Errors
VI. 9	VI. 9	VI. 12
VII. 6	VII. 6	VII. 8
VIII. 3	VIII. 3	VIII. 5
 

 

 S-4	 S-5	 S-6 [Pg 93]
attempting	expressing	machines
economize	expressions	honored
carelessness	suggestions	endorsed
stenographer	likelihood	occasional
decoration	manufactures	epistle
particulars	maintained	mispel
grandmother	maintaining	innocent
extravagance	occasions	inferred
firecracker	notwithstanding	matured
exposition	remitting	proffer
partially	sentiments	invested
pleasantly	specialty	logic
congenial	unsettled	audited
carnation	beforehand	academy
gophers	misunderstand	formally
whatsoever	alteration	importing
demonstrate	apologies	masonic
disposition	appreciates	mutilate
embroider	contribution	shelving
prescription	developments	socialist
 

Standard Number of Errors
VI. 12	VI. 12	VI. 12
VII. 8	VII. 8	VII. 8
VIII. 5	VIII. 5	VIII. 5
 

 

 S-7	 S-8	 S-9 [Pg 94]
tenement	accorded	comment
thereabouts	activities	descriptive
transacted	adjustable	declamation
indigestion	affectionate	deducted
interruption	undershirt	economical
facilitate	appropriate	encouragement
facility	approximately	endeavor
fraternity	cemetery	endeavoring
inaugurate	commodities	expectation
mathematics	comparatively	faculties
reciprocate	critical	feasible
tabernacle	introduce	financing
thermometer	dreadfully	hysterics
vivisection	dividend	ignoramus
affiliated	purchases	inability
appreciative	directories	industrious
indefinitely	disaster	pocketbook
probability	dictionary	representatives
informal	depositing	instructions
dressmaker	depository	sufficiently
 

Standard Number of Errors
VI. 13	VI. 12	VI. 12
VII. 10	VII. 8	VII. 9
VIII. 7	VIII. 5	VIII. 6
 

 

 S-10	 S-11	 S-12 [Pg 95]
detain	alcohol	exceedingly
deprive	charity	insignificant
exhaust	comedy	wonderfully
whoever	imitate	measurement
expire	invalid	sacrifice
faithful	lovable	sarcastic
frequent	operate	satisfying
happiest	opium	selecting
disgust	remodel	temperance
apology	taxicab	thoughtfulness
homelike	allowing	marriage
hopeful	borrowing	unanswered
intrude	chocolate	undertaking
lantern	promise	willingly
liquor	conductor	population
output	congress	advisability
outrage	decorate	agreement
physic	deposits	celebration
becoming	developed	comparison
discount	discover	emergency
 

Standard Number of Errors
VI. 9	VI. 10	VI. 12
VII. 6	VII. 7	VII. 9
VIII. 3	VIII. 4	VIII. 6
 

[Pg 96]

USE OF THE CONTRACTION

One of the first things to learn in writing letters is that the form and style of the letter must be suited to the message which the letter contains, and to the relationship which exists between the person who sends the letter and the one who is to receive it. The style of business letters must be clear, direct, and dignified. With certain exceptions, as in sales letters, such letters are usually made very impersonal. On the other hand, personal letters are quite properly regarded by many as a sort of conversation in writing. In writing to friends or to relatives one usually desires to be informal. One of the ways of achieving this informality is through the use of colloquial English and contractions. In the past, many teachers of English have cautioned students against the use of contractions in letters; but an examination of the correspondence of writers whose letters are regarded as models shows that most of these authors use contractions very freely. If you will read the letters of Henry Adams, Stevenson, Gray, Henry James, Lamb, Carroll, Walpole, Keats, Emily Dickinson, Thackeray, Dickens, and others, you will see that in writing to friends and members of their families they wrote much as they would have chatted with those to whom the letters were addressed.

In general, then, contractions are to be used only in informal or friendly correspondence. In letters to strangers and in most business correspondence they should be avoided. Perhaps the best guide to the proper use of contractions is to be found in the models of writers who are famous for their personal letters.

[Pg 97] can't "You can't be too careful." (Lamb)

don't "... for, O, I don't know how long." (Stevenson)

doesn't "He doesn't agree with them all ..." (Stevenson)

won't "This sort of thing won't do." (H. James)

it's "... It's a glorious afternoon ..." (E. Dickinson)

I'm "I'm three parts through Burns; ..." (Stevenson)

I'll "I'll try to improve it ..." (Stevenson)

haven't "... I haven't yet had time to give ..." (H. James)

you'll "You'll never guess; ..." (Carroll)

isn't "It isn't like gold ..." (E. Dickinson)

I've "So I've been idle." (Stevenson)

we'll "We'll finish an education sometime ..." (E. Dickinson)

wouldn't "... but Stephen wouldn't allow it ..." (Stevenson)

didn't "... I didn't see him." (Fitzgerald)

I'd "Another shot and I'd have gone to kingdom come." (Stevenson)

you'd "... and I beg you'd believe me ..." (Gray)

hadn't "... if you hadn't seen her ..." (H. James)

hasn't "This ought to have made me gay, but it hasn't." (Stevenson)

couldn't "If it were easy to write a play, I couldn't ... think of it." (H. James)

wasn't "Wasn't it curious?" (Carroll)

[Pg 98]
[Pg 99]

DICTATION EXERCISES

The following letters contain a large number of words which occur with relatively high frequency in correspondence, and are quite likely to be mispeled by persons of eighth grade education. They should be dictated in short phrases of three to five words without repetition, pausing after each dictated phrase for the children to write. The rate should be such, however, that the dictation and writing will be completed in the time designated in the note preceding each letter. On the average this will be about one and one-half lines per minute. A little practice will enable the teacher to dictate at this rate without difficulty.

Pupils should be able to write these letters at the given speed without hesitation or error of spelling before they have completed the work of this grade.

[Pg 100] LETTER NO. 1

This letter should be dictated in three sections. The first exercise extends to the end of the first paragraph, including the heading and salutation, and should be written in 8 minutes. The second exercise includes the second and third paragraphs and should be written in 9 minutes. The third exercise completes the letter and should be written in 6–½ minutes.

 

[Pg 101] Des Moines, Iowa,
June 2, 1920.
 

Dear Mamma,
I suppose you feel that I have been very slow about writing, but I haven't had a minute for either letter writing or pleasure the past few days. I took my last test this forenoon—the terrible and much dreaded literature examination. It lasted from ten o'clock until noon, and though it was different from what I had expected I think I got along all right. I probably won't get an excellent grade, for I just had to make a guess at one answer I didn't know, but you can't imagine how happy I am to be all through. Tomorrow will be the last day of school and our superintendent is going to let us celebrate with a class party.

Aunt Lucy wants me to stay with her another month, but I am coming home Saturday, for I know I'll be eager to get back to the farm just as soon as we have good weather again. Last Sunday I accepted Edith's invitation to spend the day with her. She lives about thirty miles from Des Moines, and I enjoyed the drive over the country roads. I'm sure I'll never lose my love for the farm.

I must tell you, too, about Edith's brother, a lieutenant, who got his commission at the same time John did. He is personally acquainted with John's captain and knew several other men in that company. I was very much interested in his account of his army experiences.

I appreciated the check you enclosed in your last letter, for I needed some money for my new dress. I never realized before this year how much it costs to clothe a girl. I wish you were here to advise me what kind of material to get. I miss your judgment when I try to go shopping alone. Aunt Lucy's voile dress has given her a great deal of service, and so I think I'll decide on that material for my best summer dress.

Remember me to the boys when you write, and give my love to Grandmother. I do hope her rheumatism is better.

Affectionately,
Helen.
[Pg 102] LETTER NO. 2

This letter should be dictated in two sections. The first exercise extends to the end of the first paragraph, including the heading and salutation, and should be written in 12 minutes. The second exercise completes the letter and should be written in 7 minutes.

 

[Pg 103] October 18, 1920.
Iowa Land and Loan Company,
706–712 Commerce Building,
Des Moines, Iowa.
 

Gentlemen,
We take this occasion to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the 17th inst., and sincerely appreciate the interest which you have shown in our association. We must find a permanent location for our Chautauqua, and believe that we have found lots which will be satisfactory, especially since they are in a really pleasant locality, convenient to the college. Since it will be necessary to investigate this business opportunity immediately, we are referring the matter to a committee and we feel the analysis of the situation will be complete. The committee to which this matter is referred will probably recommend giving a mortgage but quite certainly will receive advice on this point from representative citizens. The money to carry on the investigation is in the First National Bank, the certificate of deposit being in the hands of the treasurer of the association.

If possible the members of the association would like to issue the bulletin which contains the course by the beginning of the season, whether the matter of permanent grounds is thoroughly investigated, or not. Experience has taught us, too, that the bulletins are received with more enthusiasm at an early date.

The truly awful accident of last year in which two people were killed when the tent fell will have its influence on our present campaign for a permanent building.

Kindly give this matter your attention at your earliest convenience.

Respectfully yours,
Henry Jones.
[Pg 104] LETTER NO. 3

This letter should be dictated in two sections. The first exercise extends to the end of the second paragraph and should be written in 7 minutes. The second exercise completes the letter and should be written in 9 minutes.

 

[Pg 105] Minneapolis, Minnesota,
March 26, 1920.
 

Dear Father,
You can see from the article which I enclose that we did not disappoint our principal, even though it has been impossible to practice during the past week. Under the circumstances it doesn't seem possible that we could have won, but maybe our success was due to having no practice before the game. Some of the teams seemed rather over-trained.

The coach changed me to right forward, although, as you know, I usually play at guard. I suppose there was a doubt in his mind as to whether I could guard the tall forwards on some of the teams.

Our team never played together better. We didn't have so great a variety of plays as some of the other teams, but relied almost entirely upon our short passing game. What I liked especially was that there wasn't a single poor official. One of the officials was the man who spoke last fall on our community health program.

I suppose the team will reach home Saturday night. I am sure that we ought not to stay here later than Saturday noon. The teams were entertained at the various fraternity houses and the men have been very much crowded to make room for us. We certainly appreciate the good treatment we have received from these men and from everyone.

Affectionately, your son,
Harry.
[Pg 106] LETTER NO. 4

This letter should be dictated in three sections. The first exercise extends to the end of the second paragraph, including the heading and the salutation, and should be written in 9 minutes. The second exercise includes the rest of the letter and should be written in 12 minutes. Not more than one exercise should be given in one day.

[Pg 107] Newark, New Jersey,
December 3, 1920.
Mr. Frank A. Hardy, Managing Editor,
National Insurance Journal,
Boston, Massachusetts.
 

My dear Mr. Hardy,
I am glad to make an immediate reply to your inquiry of December 1, regarding Miss Henry's qualifications.

It is now eight years since Miss Henry first took a position with us. She began as mail clerk, working up rapidly through the ranks, until she became private secretary to Mr. Baldwin, President of the Central Insurance Company, in which capacity she has served for four years, becoming an important part of the institution. We have found her always courteous, thoroughly efficient in her work, and absolutely reliable.

She is well equipped for a position on an insurance publication because of her magazine writing, which she has been doing in connection with a course in journalism at the university this year. She has been most successful in this work and hopes to find time to do more of it during the summer term if her schedule will permit. It was only because of her great desire to continue her education that we were willing to accept her resignation, and we knew that this year's work at the university would mean a broader field for her in the future.

I am enclosing a record of Miss Henry's work, on the usual form kept for each employee, showing the approximate progress she made during her eight years with us and her increased value to the company, and I am also sending under separate cover Miss Henry's photograph, as you suggested.

Hoping I may hear from you further if there is any additional information you require, I am

Very sincerely yours,
John Smith.
[Pg 108]
[Pg 109]

SUPPLEMENT WHICH CONTAINS CERTAIN
  RULES AND DEFINITIONS OFTEN TAUGHT
  AS A PART OF THE COURSE OF STUDY
  IN SPELLING

As a part of the course of study in spelling, there is occasionally found a provision for word study and for teaching certain rules and definitions. The following supplement is added as a guide in schools which make such a requirement. Ordinarily such topics as derivation of words, root prefixes, suffixes, homonyms, antonyms, synonyms, and hyphens are taught, either as a part of composition or as a part of dictionary exercises.

The value of teaching spelling rules is still somewhat a matter of controversy, although the weight of experimental evidence seems to indicate that children do not profit from a study of the rules in spelling, as much as they profit from the same amount of time spent in the direct study of the important words covered by these rules. However, since some city and state courses of study require the teaching of the rules, it seems advisable to put the more important rules in this supplement.

An effort has been made to state these rules in the simplest manner possible, within the limits of accuracy. Great care has been taken, also, to tabulate, for each rule, the words frequently used in correspondence, which are exceptions.

The teacher should understand clearly that it is not the intention of the authors to have these rules take the place of the direct teaching of any word. Rather they are to be regarded as supplementary exercises. It is doubtful whether much attention should be given to rules before grade seven.

DERIVATION OF WORDS

Often one word is built up from several words or syllables. The most important part of such a built-up word is called the root, or base. This root or base had an original meaning [Pg 110] which is usually clear, especially in purely English words, as in-side, happi-ness, etc. Many built-up or derivative words are from other languages. A few examples may help to illustrate:

1. international—Latin inter (between) plus nation (nation) plus al (pertaining to)—between nations, pertaining to intercourse between nations.

The root is "nation."

2. extraordinary—Latin extra (on the outside, out of) plus ordinarius (ordinary)—out of the ordinary, unusual.

The root is "ordinar."

3. provide—Latin pro (before) plus vid (to look or see)—to look before or ahead, to look out for in advance.

The root is "vid."

4. convention—Latin con (together) plus ven (to come) plus tion (act of)—act of coming together—meeting.

The root is "ven."

Many roots or bases are taken directly from the English:

1. out-come—act of coming out—that which comes out of something else—result.

2. in-side—inner side or surface.

3. cheer-ful—full of cheer.

4. happi-ness—state of being happy.

In studying these words, you may have noticed that something besides the root or base is needed to make the meaning clear. The other two parts which help to make up words are called prefixes and suffixes. These will be taken up separately.

PREFIXES

A prefix is a word or syllable placed before another word, and so completely joined to it that it changes the meaning of the basic word.

Note to Teacher:—Have the pupils select in the lessons of your grade, words which have similar prefixes.

[Pg 111] As you can see in the list below, the final consonant of a prefix has often been changed to make the pronunciation easier, but does not disappear when added to the stem. Thus, ad-cord became ac-cord, ad-fect became af-fect, etc.

Prefix	Definition	Illustration
ab (abs, a)	from, away	abandon
ad (ac, af, ag, al, an, ap, ar, as, at)	to	accommodate
ante	before	antecedent
circum	about, around	circumstance
com (co, col, con, cor)	with, together	compare, concert
de	from, down, away	desert, debate
dis (dif, de)	apart, not	disobey
ex (e, ef)	out, out of, away from, off, beyond	expect
extra	out of	extraordinary
in (ill, im, ir)	in, into, not, without	inside
inter	among, between, mutually	interurban
non	not	nonsense
per	through, by, for	perhaps
post	behind, after	postpone
pre	before	prevent
pro	forward, before, instead	provide
re	back, again, against	return
se	aside, apart, without	separate
sub (suc, suf, sug, sup, sur)	under, below, near	subject, succeed
super	over, above, beyond	superintendent
trans (tran, tra)	across, over, beyond, through	transfer, travel
SUFFIXES

A suffix is a syllable or word which is added to the end of another word to change the meaning of the basic word.

Note to Teacher:—As the suffix is often closely connected with the root of the word, not much stress will be laid on learning suffixes by themselves. A few of the more common ones will be noted.

Suffix	Definition	Illustration [Pg 112]
ful	with or full of	cheerful
less	without	careless, doubtless
ness	state of being	happiness
ly	like or like in manner	happily
ment	act, state, a thing that	development
some	act of being	lonesome
HOMONYMS

A homonym is a word pronounced exactly like another, but differing from it in meaning. A few homonyms are spelled in the same way, as "weed," a garment, and "weed," a plant. Only a small group of the more common type will be given here.

Note to Teacher:—It has been deemed advisable to omit giving an extensive list of homonyms here. You may refer the pupils to the lists of homonyms which occur in the regular spelling lessons of the first five grades. For example, the following lists are among those which contain homonyms:—16 in grade I; 18, 19, 20, in grade II; 12 words in 28 of grade III; 32 in grade IV; etc.

Word	Definition	Sentence
1. flour	a fine meal of ground wheat	Mother uses flour in baking
 	   or other grain	  bread.
  flower	a blossom	The rose is a beautiful flower.
2. no	not, not any	I have no work to do.
  know	to understand	Do you know your lesson?
3. son	a male child; the male offspring	 
 	  of a parent, father or mother	John is my son.
  sun	the heavenly body which produces	The sun rises in the east.
 	  the light of day	 
SYNONYMS

Synonyms are words that have almost the same meaning. If you were to look up the simple words "cut" and "ask" you would find the following synonyms:

For "cut"—carve, lance, bite, dissect, snip, saw, slice, slit, slash, etc.

For "ask"—beg, crave, entreat, beseech, implore, move, plead, solicit, etc. No two of these synonyms mean exactly [Pg 113] the same thing, but they express different shades of the same meaning.

Practice Exercises: Find as many synonyms as you can for the following words:

best
decide
effort
deceive
imagine
dark
time
form
pleasure
public

Any lesson in the book may be used for an exercise in discovering synonyms.

ANTONYMS

Words of opposite meaning are called antonyms. For example, black—white; big—little; and open—closed, are so named.

Practice Exercises: Try to think of antonyms for the following words:

cold
come
dull
inside
fat
front
good
high
in
large
up
long
new
poor
slow
spring
sweet
tall
wet
winter

THE HYPHEN

Authorities differ in regard to the use of the hyphen. However, there are two rules which always hold good: (1). The hyphen is used to separate compound adjectives; (2). The hyphen is used to show, at the end of a line, that a word has been divided. (Such a word must be divided between syllables.) In other cases, when you cannot decide whether or not to use a hyphen, consult the dictionary used in your school. It is much less frequently used than formerly.

RULES FOR SPELLING

I. Formation of Possessives

1. The following list is made up of words in the singular number. To form the possessive, add an apostrophe and "s."

horse's head
man's coat
girl's dress
boy's shoes
soldier's uniform
child's laugh
sheep's wool
sister's hat

2. The following list is made up of plural nouns that do not end in "s." To form the possessive, add an apostrophe and "s."

children's clothes
men's shirts
women's praise
gentlemen's plans

[Pg 114] 3. The following list is made up of plural nouns ending in "s."

To form the possessive, add only an apostrophe.

miles' walk
girls' clothing
years' word
pupils' attention

II. Treatment of the final consonant before a suffix

1. The following list contains words of one syllable. Notice that each word ends in a consonant, and that in every word there is a single short vowel preceding it. In all such words, the final consonant is doubled before adding a suffix beginning with a vowel.

big—bigg (er) (est)
drop—dropp(ed) (ing)
stop—stopp(ed) (ing)
plan—plann(ed) (ing)
begin—beginn(er) (ing)

2. The following list contains verbs of more than one syllable. Each verb is accented on the last syllable, and ends in a single consonant preceded by a single short vowel. In such verbs, the final consonant is doubled before a suffix beginning with a vowel.

beginn(ing)
referr(ed) (ing)
occurr(ed)
forgott(en)
remitt(ance)

III. Adding suffixes to words ending in "e"

1. A word ending in silent "e" drops the "e" before a vowel, as:

come—coming
hope—hoping
serve—serving
appreciate—appreciating
vote—voting

2. When a suffix beginning with a consonant is added to a word ending in "e," the "e" is kept.

announce—announce-ment
hope—hope-ful
late—late-ly
care—care-less
lone—lone-some

[Pg 115] 3. "E" is retained to keep the soft sound of "c" and "g" before "a" and "o" as in notice—notice-able, and advantage—advantage-ous.

Exceptions:

Of the words commonly used in writing letters the following exceptions are to be made:

a. When a suffix beginning with a consonant is added to a word ending in "e":

(1) Only three words drop "e" before adding "ment": judgment, acknowledgment, argument.

(2) Only one word drops "e" before adding "ful": awful.

(3) Only three words drop "e" before adding "ly":

true—truly
due—duly
whole—wholly

b. When the last syllable of a word ends in "le," "ly" does not make a new syllable, as: probable—-probably, possible—possibly, simple—simply.

(When "ly" is added to words ending in "l," both "l's" are retained, as: practical—practically, careful—carefully.)

IV. Treatment of the final "y"

1. To form the plural of a noun ending in "y" preceded by a consonant, change the "y" to "i" and add "es."

lady—ladies
quantity—quantities
quality—qualities

2. When a verb ends in "y" preceded by a consonant, change the "y" to "i" and add "es" to form the third person singular of the verb. To form the past tense of the verb, change the "y" to "i" and add "ed."

fry—fries
cry—cries
bury—buried
carry—carried

3. When a word ends in "y" preceded by a vowel, form the plural by adding "s."

turkey—turkeys
chimney—chimneys
valley—valleys

4. When "y" is preceded by a consonant, change it to "i" before a suffix which does not begin with "i," as in business, readily, happiness, etc.

Retain "y" in such words as: hurrying, crying, flying, etc.

[Pg 116]V. Treatment and use of the apostrophe

1. Put the apostrophe in the place of the absent letter or letters: aren't, don't, didn't, can't, I'll, etc.

2. Possessives of personal pronouns have no apostrophe, as: its, hers, ours, yours, etc.

VI. Irregular Plurals

Some words ending in "f" or "fe" form their plurals by changing the "f" or "fe" to "v" and adding "es."

half—halves
knife—knives
life—lives
leaf—leaves
calf—calves
wife—wives

VII. Confusion of "ei" and "ie"

Note to Teacher:—Experimental evidence does not seem to show that this rule is very effective, but if it is taught, the following presentation is recommended.

Whenever "i" and "e" occur together in one syllable, and are pronounced as "[=e]" or "[)e]," it is always "i" before "e" except after "c" (see). When sounded like "[=a]" it is always "e" before "i." Some have used the following jingle to help fix the rule:

"i" before "e"
Except after "c"
Or when sounded like "a"
As in neighbor or weigh.

Four of the words most commonly used in writing letters are exceptions to these rules: neither, leisure, foreign, height.

Transcriber's Note

Punctuation errors have been corrected.
All misprinted reference pages throughout the book have been corrected (vii-xvi).
Pg 17 Added missing "opening quotation" before "Remember" in "Remember that the purpose of this test ..."
Pg 97 Removed ")" after "I didn't see him.")" and added "(" before "Fitzgerald"
Pg 97 Corrected spelling of "kindom" to "kingdom" in "... gone to kindom come"
Pg 103 Corrected spelling of "expecially" to "especially" in "... expecially since they are in ..."
Pg 109 Corrected spelling of "occassionally" to "occasionally" in "... there is occassionally found ..."





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Lippincott's Horn-Ashbaugh Speller, by 
Ernest Horn and Ernest J. Ashbaugh

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LIPPINCOTT'S HORN-ASHBAUGH SPELLER ***

***** This file should be named 33826-h.htm or 33826-h.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/3/8/2/33826/

Produced by Larry B. Harrison and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


